The Asian seabass boule and dazl RNA expression is restricted to the gonads.Bisexual germline-specific expression pattern of both genesObservation on dynamics of Balbiani body formationDifferential temporospatial and subcellular distribution in the germ cellsGerm cell markers to define critical stages of the Asian seabass gametogenesisFertility genes boule and dazl constitute the evolutionarily conserved DAZ (Deleted in AZoospermia) family of RNA binding proteins essential for germline development across animal phyla. Here we report the cloning and expression analysis of boule and dazl from the Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer), a marine fish that undergoes sequential male-to-female sex reversal. Molecular cloning and sequence comparison led to the identification of boule and dazl cDNAs. RT-PCR analysis showed that both boule and dazl RNAs were restricted to the gonads among adult organs examined. Chromogenic in situ hybridization revealed germ cell-specific expression for both boule and dazl in female and male adults. Importantly, distinct differences were found between boule and dazl in terms of temporospatial expression and subcellular distribution. The boule RNA was abundant in late gametogenic cells except sperm. Interestingly, dazl expression increases in early oocytes and concentrates in a perinuclear speckle that appears to develop ultimately into the Balbiani body in advanced oocytes. The dazl RNA was found to be abundant in spermatocytes but hardly detectable in sperm. These data demonstrate that boule and dazl are germ cell markers in the adult Asian seabass, and that bisexual germline-specific expression has been conserved for boule and dazl in fish.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.TheranosticsInternational Journal of Medical SciencesNanotheranosticsJournal of CancerJournal of GenomicsGlobal reach, higher impactJournal of Genomics - Submit manuscript now...Int J Biol Sci 2014; 10(2):225-235. doi:10.7150/ijbs.6797Research PaperHongyan Xu, Menghuat Lim, Manali Dwarakanath, Yunhan HongDepartment of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14 Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543.Germ cells produce sperm and eggs for reproduction and fertility. The Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer), a protandrous marine fish, undergoes male-female sex reversal and thus offers an excellent model to study the role of germ cells in sex differentiation and sex reversal. Here we report the cloning and expression of vasa as a first germ cell marker in this organism. A 2241-bp cDNA was cloned by PCR using degenerate primers of conserved sequences and gene-specific primers. This cDNA contains a polyadenylation signal and a full open reading frame for 645 amino acid residues, which was designated as Lcvasa for the seabass vasa, as its predicted protein is homologous to Vasa proteins. The Lcvasa RNA is maternally supplied and specific to gonads in adulthood. By chromogenic and fluorescent in situ hybridization we revealed germ cell-specific Lcvasa expression in both the testis and ovary. Importantly, Lcvasa shows dynamic patterns of temporospatial expression and subcellular distribution during gametogenesis. At different stages of oogenesis, for example, Lcvasa undergoes nuclear-cytoplasmic redistribution and becomes concentrated preferentially in the Balbiani body of stage-II~III oocytes. Thus, the vasa RNA identifies both female and male germ cells in the Asian seabass, and its expression and distribution delineate critical stages of gametogenesis.Keywords: Asian seabass, gametogenesis, gene expression, germ cell, oogenesis, sex reversal, vasa.Germ cell development is the basis of sexual reproduction and fertility. In diverse animal species, primordial germ cells (PGCs) segregate from the soma early in embryogenesis. PGCs migrate into the developing gonad and become gonadal germ stem cells, oogonia in the ovary and spermatogonia in the testis [1]. At sexual maturation, germ stem cells undergo self-renewal and differentiation, meiosis entry and progression, culminating in the production of eggs in female and sperm in male [2]. The mechanism underlying how a germ cell makes the decision to undergo either egg or sperm production has long been a mystery.Sex development involves sex determination and differentiation. Genetically, maleness in mammals is determined by gene Sry [3], and in the fish medaka by gene dmy [4] also called dmrt1y [5]. Although the final decision for sperm or egg production is ultimately made in and by germ cells, most studies on sex differentiation have so far focused on the gonadal somatic sex [6], Formation of testis-triggering Sertoli cells or ovary-triggering granulose or follicular cells is considered as determining the gonadal sex, which in turn determines the organism sex and germ cell sexuality [6]. It is generally accepted that a sexually bipotential germ cell pool makes the decision absolutely depending upon the gonadal sex. In fish, the sexual bipotentiality or plasticity of germ stem cells has been demonstrated by transplantation experiments [7]. Accumulating data argue for or against the involvement of germ cells in sex differentiation and reversal. A conserved interplay between germ cells and gonadal sex has indeed been reported in cattle, zebrafish and medaka [8], where animals with germ cells usually develop into two opposite sexes, while those without germ cells produce only one sex, male. We have recently revealed differential expression of germ genes boule and dazl in male and female gonial cells of the rainbow trout, pointing to germ cell sex prior to meiosis and possibly a role for germ cells in sex differentiation [9, 10].In higher vertebrates including mammals and birds, stable sexual dimorphism prevails, because maleness or femaleness, once established, is usually retained throughout lifespan. In many invertebrates and lower vertebrates such as fish, hermaphroditism is commonplace, with one organism developing into both sexes. Simultaneous hermaphrodites have both the ovary and testis and thus produce eggs and sperm at the same time, such as Rivulus marmoratus [11]. Sequential hermaphrodites produce sperm and eggs or vice versa in different times. Many marine teleosts, in particular those of the order Perciformes, are either protandrous hermaphrodites (male first) or protogynous hermaphrodites (female first). In these hermaphroditic organisms, sex development also involves sex reversal. One of such protandrous perches is the Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer), which undergoes male-to-female sex reversal under natural conditions: It matures as male and changes to female [12]. In this organism, sex reversal accompanies major morphological changes of the gonad but lacks an intermediate gonadal status of ovotestis, and testicular and ovarian tissues cannot be found in one and the same gonad [13], Therefore, the seabass represents an excellent model to study the role and behavior of germ cells not only in sex determination and differentiation but also in sex reversal.To study germ cell development, a germ cell marker is required. One of the best candidate genes is vasa, which was first identified in Drosophila by genetic screens for maternal-effect mutations. vasa is essential for the anterior-posterior polarity and germ cell formation [14]. Vasa is an RNA helicase of the DEAD box family and resides in the cytoplasm for involvement in translational control. The Drosophila vasa homolog has been identified in the hydra [15], silkworm [16], grasshopper [17], oyster [18], Xenopus [19], chicken [20], mouse [19], human [21] and several teleost species, such as zebrafish [22, 23], trout [24], tilapia [25], medaka [26], gibel carp [27] and grass carp [28]. vasa is a germ cell marker in many species examined so far, such as zebrafish [22, 23, 29], trout [24], tilapia [25], medaka [26], Gymnogobius [30], gibel carp [27] and rare minnow [31]. In the fish species examined in detail by in situ hybridization (ISH), vasa expression occurs in both mitotic and meiotic germ cells of both sexes [27, 32]. A similar observation has been described also for other germ genes such as boule and dazl in medaka [32] and dazl in trout [9]. One exception is boule, whose expression takes place in male gonia but not in female gonia [9]. In medaka, vasa has been reported essential for PGC migration [33].vasa has been cloned in two marine teleosts . In the gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata), vasa was examined by Northern blot analysis and chromogenic ISH, where vasa was present in the ovary, where vasa expression was prominent in vitellogenic oocytes but barely detectable in oogonia and previtellogenic oocytes [34]. In the European seabass (Dicentrarchus labrax), RT-PCR analyses revealed a high level of vasa expression in the ovary and testis as well as a remarkably reduced level of expression in 10 somatic organs [35]. A marker capable of detecting germ cells at different stages of development in both sexes of marine teleosts has remained to be established by ISH and/or immunohistochemistryIn this study, we cloned Lcvasa, the gene encoding LcVasa, the seabass homolog of highly conserved Vasa proteins, as a first germ cell marker in the seabass. By both chromogenic and fluorescent ISH, Lcvasa expression delineates germ cells throughout gametogenesis of both sexes. We reveal for the first time that Lcvasa exhibits highly dynamic expression and subcellular distribution, which allows for identification of critical stages of gametogenesis.Experiments with fish were conducted strictly following the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Advisory Committee for Laboratory Animal Research in Singapore and approved by this committee (Permit Number:067/12). The seabass and its embryos were collected from a local fish farmer. The embryos were maintained in aerated seawater at ambient temperature. Seabass embryogenesis proceeds rapidly and hatching takes place before 24 h post fertilization (hpf). Embryos were collected at an interval of 2 h upon first cleavage till the late somitogenesis for RT-PCR analysis, and staged as previously described [36]. The maturity of seabass gonads was classified as described [13]. In this study, the testis was at stage M3 (Male stage 2 according to [13] Table 1) and contains numerous cysts of sperm and spermatids, fewer spermatocytes and sparely dispersed spermatogonia. The ovary was at stage F2 (Female stage 2 according to [13] Table 1) and composed mainly of oogonia, previtellogenic and early vitellogenic oocytes.Total RNA from adult organs (100 mg) and embryos (20~30) at different stages of development (2~30 h post fertilization) were isolated with the Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen). RNA samples were treated with the RNase-free DNase (Promega) to eliminate genomic DNA contamination.A cDNA library was synthesized from 3 μg of testicular RNA by using the RACE cDNA Amplification Kit (BD BioSciences). A cDNA fragment of ~750 bp was amplified from the cDNA libraries with degenerate primers corresponding to the conserved amino acid sequences MDDWEEE and MACAQTG. The sequence of this fragment was used to design a gene-specific primer covering the initiation codon (ATGGACGACTGGGAGGAAGAGACTGC, broken underline in Figure 1) for 3'-RACE in combination with the SMART library 3' adapter primer (5'-AAGCAGTGGTAACAACGCAGAGTAC(T)30 as described [27]. The 3'-RACE product was cloned into pGEM-T. Recombinant plasmids in three colonies were found to contain one and the same insert of 2241 bp as analyzed by sequencing, and thus named pLvasa. Similarly, an 854-bp fragment was amplified from the cDNA library by using a pair of primers (defined by solid underline in Figure 1) and cloned, resulting in pLvasa854. Correct cloning was analyzed by test digestion and/or sequencing (see below).Nucleotide sequence and its deduced protein of Lcvasa cDNA. Shown in bold are the translation start codon, stop codon and putative polyadenylation signal. Underlined are RGG repeats. Primers for cloning and 3'-RACE (dash), RT-PCR analysis and riboprobe (solid) are underlined with arrows depicting their extension directions.Sequences were determined by using the BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit on ABI PrismR 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Sequence alignment was run on the Vector NTI Suite 11 (Invitrogen). Phylogenetic trees were constructed by using the neighbor-joining algorithm on the DNAMAN package (Lynmon Biosoft).cDNA synthesis was primed by oligo(dT)12-18 anchored as primer by using the Powerscript TM Reverse Transcriptase kit (Clontech, USA). Lcvasa was amplified by using cDNA-specific primers RT1 (GACCAGCAACCAGACCTCACCTTCAC) and RT2 (GAGTATGGCTGATTGTAGGGGCTGC) spanning a 431-bp cDNA fragment. As a control, an 800-bp fragment of the β-actin cDNA was amplified by using primers MA1 and MA2 (TGGAGCCTCCAATCCAGACAGAGTATT). PCR was run for 35 cycles for Lcvasa and 25 cycles for β-actin at 94°C for 10 sec, 60°C for 20 sec and 72°C for 60 sec. PCR products were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis as described [32].In situ hybridization on whole mount sample and sections were performed as described [27, 32] with some minor modifications. Adult gonads were dissected and cut into small pieces, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PBS, pH 7.4) (4% PFA-PBS) at 4°C overnight, followed by buffer changes with 0.5 M sucrose in PBS at 4°C overnight. The samples were embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature and cryosectioned at 8 μm for ovaries and 5 μm for testes on the Leica RM2135 Microtomes (Leica, Germany). The cryosections were mounted on frost glass slides (Fishery, USA) and stored at -80°C before use. pLcvasa854 containing the 854-bp Lcvasa cDNA fragment was linearized with Apa I and Sac II for the synthesis of sense and anti-sense riboprobes from Sp6 or T7 promoter by using the digoxigenin (DIG) or FITC RNA Labeling Kit (Roche). The probes were treated with RNase-free TURBO DNase (Ambion) and purified. Chromogenic and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was carried as described [32]. After extensive washes in PBS in darkness, the slides were stained for nuclei with DAPI (1 µg/ml) for 10 min at room temperature, washed three times in PBS and mounted for microscopy.Microscopic analyses were performed as previously described [27, 32]. Briefly, whole mount samples were observed in a large field using a Stereo- Fluorescence Systems (Leica MZFIII, Switzerland) and photographed. Cryosections were visualized under a Zeiss Axiovert upright microscope and photographed using a Zeiss AxioCam MRc digital camera.A 776-bp cDNA fragment was first obtained by using degenerate primers, which were designed on the basis of two conserved regions of vertebrate Vasa proteins. The sequence information from this fragment was used for 3'-RACE, leading to the cloning of a 2241 bp cDNA, designated as Lcvasa for the seabass gene encoding the Vasa homolog LcVasa. Lcvasa contains an open reading frame (ORF) of 1938 nt for 645 amino acid (aa) residues, a polyA signal and a 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of 302 bp (FIG.1). A blast search against databases revealed a maximal identity of LcVasa to known Vasa proteins. It is 65-83% and 52% identical to Vasa proteins from teleost fish and human respectively (FIG.2). Like Vasa homologs, LcVasa is characterized by an RGG-rich N-terminus and eight diagnostic motifs, namely AQTGSGKT as the ATPase motif A, PTRELA, GG, TPGR and DEAD as the ATPase motif B, SAT and ARGXD (F for any residue) for RNA unwinding, and HRIGRTGR for RNA binding. The RGG repeats at the N-terminus possibly functions in RNA binding [37] and in subcellular protein localization [38]. These eight motifs are highly conserved between LcVasa and representative Vasa proteins from invertebrates and vertebrates on a sequence alignment (FIG. 2). On a phylogenetic tree (FIG. 3), LcVasa is clustered together with Vasa but not its related family members pl10, Elf4 and p68. Therefore, LcVasa appears to be a Vasa homolog of the seabass.In many organisms including zebrafish, medaka and gibel carp, vasa RNA is supplied maternally and zygotic expression is restricted to germ cells. In the seabass, adult expression of vasa RNA was examined by RT-PCR to be high in the ovary and testis, but absent in any somatic organs examined, such as the eye, gill, heart, kidney, spleen, intestine and liver (FIG. 4A). Therefore, vasa RNA expression is restricted to the gonads. During embryogenesis, the vasa transcript is high in early stages, while persists at a reduced and detectable level in late stages till 30 hpf (FIG. 4B). Since the onset of zygotic transcription in fish occurs after midblastula transition, the vasa transcript is maternally inherited in seabass.Sequence alignment of Vasa proteins. All the sequences of Vasa homologues were retrieved from NCBI (http://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.libproxy1.nus.edu.sg/protein/?term=Vasa ). Positions of identical residues are highlighted yellow, those of shared residues blue and those of different residues green. Protein numbering is shown to the left. RGG repeats at the N-terminus are underlined. The eight conserved domains are framed. Degenerate primers are positioned by two arrows. The species' names and percentage identity values of the LcVasa to its homologs are given at the end of alignment. For accession numbers of sequences see FIG. 3.Phylogenetic tree of Vasa proteins. All the sequences of Vasa homologues were retrieved from NCBI (http://www-ncbi-nlm-nih-gov.libproxy1.nus.edu.sg/protein/?term=Vasa). The neighbor-joining algorithm was used for tree construction. Numerals at nodes are bootstrap values. Species are followed by accession numbers of sequences.RT-PCR analysis of vasa expression in seabass. (A) Adult tissues. (B) Embryos. Stages given above lanes are hours post fertilization (hpf). β-actin serves as a normalization factor.Restriction of the vasa transcript to the gonads suggests its germ cell-specific expression. To confirm this, spatial expression was analyzed by ISH in adult gonads. The adult seabass testis is mainly composed of spermatogonia and spermatogenic cells at different stages. Spermatogonia are at the most peripheral region of seminiferous cysts. Spermatogenesis proceeds synchronously within each cyst and cysts containing germ cells at progressively advanced stages of development are closer to the efferent duct. Chromogenic ISH revealed that vasa RNA expression in the testis was exclusively in germ cells, with the signal being strong in spermatogonia and spermatocytes, reduced in spermatids and barely detectable in sperm (Supplementary Material: FIG. S1). By FISH, the hybridization signal was found also strong in spermatogonia and spermatocytes, and weak in spermatids and sperm (FIG. 5A, B, C, E and F). Interestingly, the vasa RNA are distributed not only in the cytoplasm but also in the nucleus (FIG. 5D and F). At higher magnification, Lcvasa was detected in the chromatoid body (CB) of maturing sperm (FIG. 5F). Therefore, Lcvasa expression in the adult testis is limited to germ cells.In the seabass, the adult ovary is composed of somatic follicle cells, a small number of oogonia and numerous oocytes at various stages of development. Chromogenic ISH with an antisense vasa riboprobe revealed that vasa expression in the adult ovary was limited to female germ cells but absent in somatic cells on whole mount samples, where stage-III oocytes and certain oogonia displayed the strongest signal, whereas stage-IV oocytes exhibited weak signal (FIG. 7). On ovarian sections, the strongest signal was present in stage-II~III oocytes and certain oogonia (Supplementary Material: FIG. S2A). A closer inspection revealed three types of oogonia exhibiting a strong, moderate and weak signal, which are called type I (og1), II (og2) and III oogonia (og3), respectively (FIG. S2A). Distinction of three types of oogonia became more evident at higher magnification (FIG. S2B). These results suggest that Lcvasa expression in the ovary is specific to germ cells.We furthered our analysis of vasa RNA expression by fluorescent ISH (FISH), which provides improved sensitivity and simultaneous detection of two or more different signals [9, 32, 39]. After FISH, the hybridization signal was seen again throughout oogenesis (FIG. 6A and B). Its intensity varies dramatically at different stages of oogenesis. The signal in oogonia is moderate for nuclear staining and strongest for vasa staining, og2 displays the most intense nuclear staining and reduced vasa signal, and og3 shows a remarkable reduction in both nuclear staining and vasa signal.The vasa RNA is cytoplasmic and nuclear in og1 and becomes mainly cytoplasmic in og2 and og3 (FIG. 7; FIG. 6C), suggesting increase of its expression in stage-I oocytes and richest stage-II~III oocytes (FIG. 6B). Observations at higher magnification revealed that the vasa RNA exhibited highly dynamic redistribution during different stages of oogenesis (FIG. 6C-G). Three types of oogonia (og1~og3) were easily identifiable (FIG. 6C). The vasa staining in Og1 showed that vasa RNA could undergo nuclear-to-cytoplasmic redistribution when og1 develops into og2. Interestingly, the signal was seen predominantly in the nucleus of stage-I oocytes (FIG. 6D), implying that the vasa RNA could undergo cytoplasmic-to-nuclear redistribution when og3 enters into meiosis to become oocytes. Moreover, the signal concentrates in the perinuclear cytoplasm of stage-II oocytes (FIG. 6E), indicating that the export of bulky vasa RNA from the nucleus to cytoplasm when oogenesis transits from stage I to stage II of oocytes. Later at stage II, the perinuclear signal begins to radiate in the cytoplasm in a nucleus-periphery direction (FIG. 6E). In stage-III oocytes, the signal was found evenly in the cytoplasm except a spherical structure called the Balbiani body (BB) [32], In BB, the vasa RNA was most abundant (FIG. 6F). Therefore, the vasa RNA undergo a series of sequential events during oogenesis (FIG. 6G). These include nucleocytoplasmic export, cytoplasmic concentration and perinuclear localization during oogonial development, nuclear concentration at the meiotic entry, and nucleocytoplasmic export, cytoplasmic redistribution and localization into the BB during oocyte development. Therefore, the level and subcellular distribution of the vasa RNA delineate with critical major stages of oogonial and oocyte development.In summary, by sequence and pattern of RNA expression, we conclude that Lcvasa encodes a Vasa ortholog whose RNA expression is a reliable germ cell marker in the Asian seabass. In combination with position, morphology and nuclear staining, lcvasa expression and subcellular distribution allow for identification of the critical stages of female germ cell, such as self-renewal, differentiation, meiotic entry and progress.vasa expression in the adult testis by fluorescent ISH. Testicular cryosections after fluorescent ISH (green) were analyzed by microscopy. Nuclei were stained blue with DAPI. (A) Bright field micrograph showing the testicular structure. (B) Merge micrograph between bright field and fluorescent optics. (C-F) Fluorescent micrograph. Large magnification of the area boxed in (A and B), along with (E and F) highlighting spermatogonia at the periphery. Arrow, CB; sg, spermatogonium; sc1 and sc2, primary and secondary spermatocyte; sm, sperm, st, spermatid; ED, efferent ductile; Scale bars, 50 µm in (A-C, E, F) and 25 µm in (D and D').vasa RNA expression in the adult ovary by fluorescent ISH. (A and B) Micrographs showing the vasa RNA expression and distribution at the major stages. Nuclei were stained blue with DAPI. (C-F) Large magnification of the areas framed in (B), highlighting intracellular distribution of the vasa RNA at critical stages of oogenesis. (C-F) Large magnification of the areas framed c-f in (B), highlighting differential staining and subcellular distribution at representative stages of oogonia (C) and oocytes (D-F). Arrow, BB; og1~3, stages of oogonia; I~IV, stages of oocytes, so, somatic cells. Scale bars, 40 µm in (A and B) and 10 µm in (C-F). (G) Oogenic expression and subcellular distribution of Lcvasa. The signal intensity correlates with the level of abundance.vasa RNA expression in the whole mount adult ovary by chromogenic ISH. An antisense vasa riboprobe (purple) was used for ISH. Different stages of oocytes (I~IV) and oogonia (og) are seen. The hybridization signal is strong in oogonia (inset) and stage-I~III oocyte.In this study, we have identified Lcvasa, the Asian seabass vasa, as a germ cell marker in both sexes. Three lines of evidence support that Lcvasa is a true Vasa homolog. First, its predicted LcVasa protein shows the highest sequence homology to Vasa proteins among the DEAD family members described so far, and contains the eight diagnostic motifs of Vasa proteins. In addition LcVasa shares with known Vasa proteins an important feature, namely the presence of multiple N-terminal RGG-repeats that are thought to be a putative RNA-binding motif [40]. The RGG-rich N-terminus of the zebrafish Vasa protein has been implicated in subcellular localization of the fused green fluorescent protein in PGCs [38]. Second, ovarian Lcvasa RNA expression is restricted to female germ cells and barely detectable in somatic cells. Finally, testicular Lcvasa RNA expression is similarly limited to male germ cells and hardly detectable in somatic cells.Also, the embryonic expression of Lcvasa RNA is coincident with that of Vasa homolog. It is maternally inherited since it is already abundant in early stages of embryos before zygotic transcription commences. A high level of RNA persists in subsequent stage before it declines to a low level afterwards. This temporal expression pattern is reminiscent of situations in other fish species. In zebrafish, vasa RNA is also high until the early gastrula stage at 6 h post fertilization and decreases sharply to a low level [38], and is a germ plasm component and segregates with PGCs [29]. A similar expression pattern has also been reported for vasa RNA in medaka [26] and gibel carp [27]. Embryonic expression patterns similar to that of Lcvasa have been described for RNAs of other germ cell genes such as boule and dazl [32]. Future work will determine whether Lcvasa identifies PGCs in the Asian seabass embryo.The gilthead seabream represents so far the only marine teleost analyzed for germ cell-specific expression of vasa RNA by chromogenic ISH [34]. In this fish, vasa expression was examined in the ovary and found to be restricted to vitellogenic oocytes and absent in oogonia and previtellogenic oocytes, and whether vasa is expressed also in male germ cells is unclear. In this study, germ cell-specific vasa expression is evident throughout spermatogenesis and oogenesis by both chromogenic and fluorescent ISH. Specifically, the signal in oogonia is easily detectable after chromogenic ISH on whole mount samples and ovarian cryosections, and becomes even more evident after fluorescent ISH on sections. The vasa expression pattern in the Asian seabass observed in this study is similar to that reported in tilapia, in which the hybridization signal is strong in both spermatogonia and oogonia but barely detectable in spermatids [25].Gametogenesis is a complicated process and involves a series of events, including germ stem cell self-renewal and differentiation, meiosis entry and progression in both sexes, and post meiotic morphogenesis called spermiogenesis in male [41]. Understanding of the mechanisms underlying these events requires unambiguous staging of these events, which is a challenge in most animal species due to a lack of stage-specific germ cell markers. In teleosts such as zebrafish [42], oogenesis proceeds from oogonia to oocytes of different stages. Distinction between oogonia and oocytes is a precondition to study female germ stem cells' self-renewal and meiotic differentiation. This distinction is usually made on the basis of difference of DAPI staining between mitotic oogonia and meiotic oocytes. This dye does not stain the oocyte nucleus in many teleost species including medaka [32] and trout [9, 39]. Another dye is propidium iodide, which produces a similarly differential staining in zebrafish [29], gibel carp [27]. In the Asian seabass, DAPI also does not stain the oocyte nuclei. This dye, however, exhibits also cytoplasmic staining in growing oocytes of the Asian seabass. Future work will determine whether such staining is unique to this organism or common to marine perches.One striking observation described in this study is the dynamic of vasa mRNA expression and distribution. vasa mRNA expression and distributions are dynamic during animal gametogenesis. Similar dynamic expression has been reported in medaka fish [26], tilapia [25], gibel carp [27] and zebrafish [43], also dynamic expression has been studied in zebrafish [43]. Moreover, this kind of dynamics expression might be associated with its functions in germ cells as discussed in a review [44].However, vasa-RNA's dynamic distribution, such as nucleocytoplasmic redistribution, was first reported here. The dynamic nucleocytoplasmic distribution of lcvasa is reminiscent to that of CTN-RNA. CTN-RNA through different poly(A) site usage is diffusely distributed in nuclei as well as in paraspeckles, while under physiologic stress CTN-RNA is posttranscriptionally cleaved to produce protein-coding mouse cationic amino acid transporter 2 (mCAT2) mRNA and becomes distributed into cell cytoplasm [45]. Recent studies showed that paraspeckles contributes to transcriptional regulation of genes' expression [46] and functions as a reservoir for A-to-I edited mRNAs, being released into the cytoplasm under certain stress conditions [47]. At the same time, nuclear transcriptomes are reported to be longer and contain many more editing events (A-to-G or A-to-I) than cytosolic transcriptomes, and most of the sites exhibiting nucleus-specific editing are in introns or novel intergenic transcripts, also RNA editing is globally associated with the modification of microRNA regulation in 3′ untranslated regions [48, 49]. Evidences showed intron retention (IR) is a consequence of mis-splicing that leads to failed excision of intronic sequences from pre-messenger RNAs, leading to reduced mRNA and protein levels [50, 51]. Physiological IR may serve a precautionary role in dynamic gene expression through nuclear retention of mRNA during stressful situations [52, 53]. Similarly, in our study, lcvasa RNA undergoes dynamic nuclear-cytoplasm distributions during oogenesis including nucleocytoplasmic export, cytoplasmic concentration and perinuclear localization during oogonial development, nuclear concentration at the meiotic entry, and nucleocytoplasmic export, cytoplasmic localization. Maybe this kind of dynamic distribution is also associated with physiological IR or other RNA editing machinery, to address this issue, intensive investigations need to be conducted and this will provide the possibility for us to obtain new insights on understanding vasa gene functions in animal gametogenesis.Here, we identify three types of oogonia, on the basis of positioning in the germinal epithelium, nuclear staining and more importantly, vasa staining and its subcellular distribution. In addition, differential vasa staining and distribution also enable distinction between stage I and II. Future work is needed to determine whether type I, II and III of oogonia are self-renewing oogonial stem cells, proliferating oogonia and differentiating oogonia, respectively. The identification of these 5 earliest stages of oogenesis provides a basis to study female germ stem cell self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation and entry into meiosis in the Asian seabass as a model of marine teleosts.Fig.S1-S2.aa, amino acid(s); bp, base pair(s); ISH, in situ hybridization; hpf, hour(s) post fertilization; nt, nucleotide(s); M3, male stage 3; F3, female stage 3.We thank J. Deng for fish samples and CM Foong for laboratory management. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Singapore (NRF-CRP7-2010-03).H.X., M.L., and M.D. performed the research; H.X. analyzed the data; H.X. and Y.H. designed the research and wrote the paper.No competing financial interests exist.1. Wylie C. Germ cells. Cell. 1999;96:165-742. Raz E. Primordial germ-cell development: the zebrafish perspective. Nat Rev Genet. 2003;4:690-7003. Fechner PY. The role of SRY in mammalian sex determination. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1996;38(4):380-94. Matsuda M, Nagahama Y, Shinomiya A. et al. DMY is a Y-specific DM-domain gene required for male development in the medaka fish. Nature. 2002;417:559-635. Nanda I, Kondo M, Hornung U. et al. A duplicated copy of DMRT1 in the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome of the medaka, Oryzias latipes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:11778-836. Kocer A, Reichmann J, Best D, Adams IR. Germ cell sex determination in mammals. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009;15:205-137. Okutsu T, Suzuki K, Takeuchi Y. et al. Testicular germ cells can colonize sexually undifferentiated embryonic gonad and produce functional eggs in fish. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103:2725-98. Kurokawa H, Saito D, Nakamura S. et al. Germ cells are essential for sexual dimorphism in the medaka gonad. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:16958-639. Li M, Shen Q, Wong FM. et al. Germ cell sex prior to meiosis in the rainbow trout. Protein Cell. 2011;2:48-5410. Bejar J, Hong Y, Schartl M. Mitf expression is sufficient to direct differentiation of medaka blastula derived stem cells to melanocytes. Development. 2003;130:6545-5311. Sola L, Marzovillo M, Rossi AR. et al. Cytogenetic analysis of a self-fertilizing fish, Rivulus marmoratus: remarkable chromosomal constancy over a vast geographic range. Genome. 1997;40:945-912. Yue GH, Xia JH, Liu F, Lin G. Evidence for Female-Biased Dispersal in the Protandrous Hermaphroditic Asian Seabass, Lates calcarifer. PLoS One. 2012;7:e3797613. Guiguen Y, Jalabert B, Thouard E, Fostier A. Changes in plasma and gonadal steroid hormones in relation to the reproductive cycle and the sex inversion process in the protandrous seabass, Lates calcarifer. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 1993;92:327-3814. Lasko PF, Ashburner M. The product of the Drosophila gene vasa is very similar to eukaryotic initiation factor-4A. Nature. 1988;335:611-715. Mochizuki K, Nishimiya-Fujisawa C, Fujisawa T. Universal occurrence of the vasa-related genes among metazoans and their germline expression in Hydra. Dev Genes Evol. 2001;211:299-30816. Nakao H. Isolation and characterization of a Bombyx vasa-like gene. Dev Genes Evol. 1999;209:312-617. Chang CC, Dearden P, Akam M. Germ line development in the grasshopper Schistocerca gregaria: vasa as a marker. Dev Biol. 2002;252:100-1818. Fabioux C, Huvet A, Lelong C. et al. Oyster vasa-like gene as a marker of the germline cell development in Crassostrea gigas. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004;320:592-819. Fujiwara Y, Komiya T, Kawabata H. et al. Isolation of a DEAD-family protein gene that encodes a murine homolog of Drosophila vasa and its specific expression in germ cell lineage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994;91:12258-6220. Tsunekawa N, Naito M, Sakai Y. et al. Isolation of chicken vasa homolog gene and tracing the origin of primordial germ cells. Development. 2000;127:2741-5021. Castrillon DH, Quade BJ, Wang TY. et al. The human VASA gene is specifically expressed in the germ cell lineage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97:9585-9022. Olsen LC, Aasland R, Fjose A. A vasa-like gene in zebrafish identifies putative primordial germ cells. Mech Dev. 1997;66:95-10523. Yoon C, Kawakami K, Hopkins N. Zebrafish vasa homologue RNA is localized to the cleavage planes of 2- and 4-cell-stage embryos and is expressed in the primordial germ cells. Development. 1997;124:3157-6524. Yoshizaki G, Sakatani S, Tominaga H, Takeuchi T. Cloning and characterization of a vasa-like gene in rainbow trout and its expression in the germ cell lineage. Mol Reprod Dev. 2000;55:364-7125. Kobayashi T, Kajiura-Kobayashi H, Nagahama Y. Differential expression of vasa homologue gene in the germ cells during oogenesis and spermatogenesis in a teleost fish, tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus. Mech Dev. 2000;99:139-4226. Shinomiya A, Tanaka M, Kobayashi T. et al. The vasa-like gene, olvas, identifies the migration path of primordial germ cells during embryonic body formation stage in the medaka, Oryzias latipes. Dev Growth Differ. 2000;42:317-2627. Xu H, Gui J, Hong Y. Differential expression of vasa RNA and protein during spermatogenesis and oogenesis in the gibel carp (Carassius auratus gibelio), a bisexually and gynogenetically reproducing vertebrate. Dev Dyn. 2005;233:872-8228. Li CJ, Liu L, Chen XH. et al. Identification of a vasa homologue gene in grass carp and its expression pattern in tissues and during embryogenesis. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2010;157:159-6629. Knaut H, Pelegri F, Bohmann K. et al. Zebrafish vasa RNA but not its protein is a component of the germ plasm and segregates asymmetrically before germline specification. J Cell Biol. 2000;149:875-8830. Saito T, Otani S, Fujimoto T. et al. The germ line lineage in ukigori, Gymnogobius species (Teleostei: Gobiidae) during embryonic development. Int J Dev Biol. 2004;48:1079-8531. Cao M, Yang Y, Xu H. et al. Germ cell specific expression of Vasa in rare minnow, Gobiocypris rarus. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2012;162:163-7032. Xu H, Li Z, Li M. et al. Boule is present in fish and bisexually expressed in adult and embryonic germ cells of medaka. PLoS One. 2009;4:e609733. Li M, Hong N, Xu H. et al. Medaka vasa is required for migration but not survival of primordial germ cells. Mech Dev. 2009;126:366-8134. Cardinali M, Gioacchini G, Candiani S. et al. Hormonal regulation of vasa-like messenger RNA expression in the ovary of the marine teleost Sparus aurata. Biol Reprod. 2004;70:737-4335. Blazquez M, Gonzalez A, Mylonas CC, Piferrer F. Cloning and sequence analysis of a vasa homolog in the European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax): tissue distribution and mRNA expression levels during early development and sex differentiation. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011;170:322-3336. Lim M. Isolation and expression analyses of dazl, vasa and sox3 genes in the seabass (Lates calcarifer). Master thesis, National University of Singapore. 200537. Hay B, Jan LY, Jan YN. Localization of vasa, a component of Drosophila polar granules, in maternal-effect mutants that alter embryonic anteroposterior polarity. Development. 1990;109:425-3338. Wolke U, Weidinger G, Koprunner M, Raz E. Multiple levels of posttranscriptional control lead to germ line-specific gene expression in the zebrafish. Curr Biol. 2002;12:289-9439. Li M, Shen Q, Xu H. et al. Differential conservation and divergence of fertility genes boule and dazl in the rainbow trout. PLoS One. 2011;6:e1591040. Liang L, Diehl-Jones W, Lasko P. Localization of vasa protein to the Drosophila pole plasm is independent of its RNA-binding and helicase activities. Development. 1994;120:1201-1141. Goto R, Saito T, Takeda T. et al. Germ cells are not the primary factor for sexual fate determination in goldfish. Dev Biol. 201242. Bally-Cuif L, Schatz WJ, Ho RK. Characterization of the zebrafish Orb/CPEB-related RNA binding protein and localization of maternal components in the zebrafish oocyte. Mech Dev. 1998;77:31-4743. Kosaka K, Kawakami K, Sakamoto H, Inoue K. Spatiotemporal localization of germ plasm RNAs during zebrafish oogenesis. Mech Dev. 2007;124:279-8944. Boulanger L, Kocer A, Daniel N. et al. Attempt to rescue sex-reversal by transgenic expression of the PISRT1 gene in XX PIS-/- goats. Sexual development: genetics, molecular biology, evolution, endocrinology, embryology, and pathology of sex determination and differentiation. 2008;2:142-5145. Prasanth KV, Prasanth SG, Xuan Z. et al. Regulating gene expression through RNA nuclear retention. Cell. 2005;123:249-6346. Schuldt A. Proteomics of the nucleolus. Nat Cell Biol. 2002;4:E3547. Nakagawa S, Hirose T. Paraspeckle nuclear bodies--useful uselessness?. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012;69:3027-3648. Solnestam BW, Stranneheim H, Hallman J. et al. Comparison of total and cytoplasmic mRNA reveals global regulation by nuclear retention and miRNAs. BMC genomics. 2012;13:57449. Chen L. Characterization and comparison of human nuclear and cytosolic editomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110:E2741-750. Takemura R, Takeiwa T, Taniguchi I. et al. Multiple factors in the early splicing complex are involved in the nuclear retention of pre-mRNAs in mammalian cells. Genes to cells: devoted to molecular & cellular mechanisms. 2011;16:1035-4951. Yap K, Lim ZQ, Khandelia P. et al. Coordinated regulation of neuronal mRNA steady-state levels through developmentally controlled intron retention. Genes Dev. 2012;26:1209-2352. Kallehauge TB, Robert MC, Bertrand E, Jensen TH. Nuclear retention prevents premature cytoplasmic appearance of mRNA. Molecular cell. 2012;48:145-5253. Wong JJ, Ritchie W, Ebner OA. et al. Orchestrated intron retention regulates normal granulocyte differentiation. Cell. 2013;154:583-95Corresponding author: Prof. Yunhan Hong, Email: dbshyh@nus.edu.sg. Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14 Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543. Fax: +65 6779 2486; Tel: +65 6516 2915Received 2013-5-30
Accepted 2013-10-15
Published 2014-2-6©2020 Ivyspring International Publisher. Terms of useLoading metricsOPEN ACCESSPEER-REVIEWEDRESEARCH ARTICLEAmong vertebrates, teleost fish exhibit a considerably wide range of sex determination patterns that may be influenced by extrinsic parameters. However even for model fish species like the zebrafish Danio rerio the precise mechanisms involved in primary sex determination have not been studied extensively. The zebrafish, a gonochoristic species, is lacking discernible sex chromosomes and the sex of juvenile fish is difficult to determine. Sequential protandrous hermaphrodite species provide distinct determination of the gender and allow studying the sex determination process by looking at the mechanism of sex reversal. This is the first attempt to understand the genetic basis of phenotypic variation for sex determination and body weight in a sequential protandrous hermaphrodite species, the gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). This work demonstrates a fast and efficient strategy for Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) detection in the gilthead sea bream, a non-model but target hermaphrodite fish species. Therefore a comparative mapping approach was performed to query syntenies against two other Perciformes, the European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), a gonochoristic species and the Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) a protandrous hermaphrodite. In this manner two significant QTLs, one QTL affecting both body weight and sex and one QTL affecting sex, were detected on the same linkage group. The co-segregation of the two QTLs provides a genomic base to the observed genetic correlation between these two traits in sea bream as well as in other teleosts. The identification of QTLs linked to sex reversal and growth, will contribute significantly to a better understanding of the complex nature of sex determination in S. aurata where most individuals reverse to the female sex at the age of two years through development and maturation of the ovarian portion of the gonad and regression of the testicular area. [Genomic sequences reported in this manuscript have been submitted to GenBank under accession numbers HQ021443–HQ021749.]Citation: Loukovitis D, Sarropoulou E, Tsigenopoulos CS, Batargias C, Magoulas A, Apostolidis AP, et al. (2011) Quantitative Trait Loci Involved in Sex Determination and Body Growth in the Gilthead Sea Bream (Sparus aurata L.) through Targeted Genome Scan. PLoS ONE 6(1): e16599. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599Editor: Sergios-Orestis Kolokotronis, American Museum of Natural History, United States of AmericaReceived: September 3, 2010; Accepted: January 5, 2011; Published: January 31, 2011Copyright: © 2011 Loukovitis et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Funding: The authors would like to acknowledge the EU FP5 BRIDGEMAP project, Hellenic Centre for Marine Research and Alexander Technological Institute of Thessaloniki as well as AQUAGENOME for financial support. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.Competing interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.Sex determination is one of the most important mechanisms in biology as well as one of the cornerstones of evolution guaranteeing sexual reproduction. Sex determination is the process by which an organism is assigned to male or female gender. Sex-linked diseases are linked to sex determination that differs significantly among species. It is to be distinguished from sex differentiation that describes the process where an undifferentiated gonad turns into an ovary or a testis. Among vertebrates teleosts present a considerably wide range of sex determination patterns, which may be influenced by environmental parameters such as temperature or group dynamics (abiotic environmentally-controlled sex determination, ESD) or is genetically determined (genetic sex determination, GSD) (for reviews see [1], [2], [3]). Nevertheless, the precise mechanisms involved in primary sex determination of fish have not been studied extensively. On the other hand, the process of sex differentiation has been the subject of several studies in fish. Interestingly, different reproduction types in fish may occur among closely related species (e.g. tilapia, Oreochromis spp.) or even among populations of the same species (e.g. platyfish, Xiphophorus maculatus) (for a review, see [4]). Furthermore, the Teleostei infraclass is the only vertebrate class covering the complete range of sexuality from gonochorism to natural hermaphroditism (either simultaneous or sequential). Up until today, model organisms in fish have been selected on the basis of several features that are important mainly for developmental studies. Thus, even in the most common model fish species like the zebrafish (Danio rerio), the mechanisms of sex determination remain unresolved [5]. Model fish species are ideal for studying physiological and developmental processes, but they mainly represent gonochoristic species, lacking discernible sex chromosomes and the sex of juvenile fish is difficult to determine. Sequential protandrous hermaphrodite species provide distinct determination of the gender and sex determination studies can be performed through the possibility of studying the mechanism of sex reversal. Consequently hermaphrodite fish species can become a target group to study sex determination although they are not belonging to the species for which extended genome information is available. However, due to the increasing interest in aquaculture fish species, research has been made in their physiology and in molecular biology while the need for genomic resources has been addressed and is developing as for example for the gilthead sea bream Sparus aurata, a sequential protandrous hermaphrodite. For commercially important gonochoristic species like the European seabass which, like the gilthead sea bream bred communally, genotypic correlations for sex have been reported [6]. Non-monogenic traits of interest like sex determination and growth in non-model species can be detected through quantitative trait loci (QTL). Quantitative genetic variation characterizes most traits in livestock, including growth-related traits and disease resistance. Interestingly, a genetic correlation between body weight and sex reversal in gilthead sea bream was shown in 1998 by pedigree based genetic parameter estimation [7]. Correlation among growth related traits and male age at maturation was reported in the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) [8]. In the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), a QTL for maturation was identified which is close to a QTL affecting body weight. QTL markers for body weight and maturation timing were also reported for the Arctic char (Salvelinus alpinus) [9]. In most aquaculture fish species, sex ratio influences significantly the structure of populations and determines their reproductive potential [3]. In the case of Sparus aurata, a sequential protandrous hermaphrodite, individuals at their early stages of sexual development have undifferentiated gonads, which mature as males at the final stage of the first reproductive cycle. From the second reproduction year on they turn to females through development and maturation of the ovarian portion of their heterosexual gonad and regression of the testicular area. Zohar et al. [10] stated that sex reversal is controlled by group dynamics and social activities. Specifically, old males have a higher potential than younger males do to experience sex reversal, and the presence of high females to male ratio inhibits the sex reversal of males. Several studies have dealt with the gilthead sea bream sex change including physiology studies [10], [11], [12] as well as gene expression studies [13], [14]; however, sex chromosomes or sex-linked genetic loci still await identification. To date molecular studies have been mainly focused on the identification of genes that establish sexual dimorphism such as the transcription factor dmrt1 in testis differentiation and cytochrome P450 aromatase in ovarian differentiation. In fact, the major sex-determining gene characterized in teleost fish is the DMY gene in medaka (Oryzias latipes) [15]. The molecular toolbox produced for the gilthead sea bream which includes a first linkage map (LG map) based on some 200 microsatellite markers [16], EST (Expressed Sequence Tag) studies (e.g. [17], [18] as well as the construction of the first radiation hybrid map (RH map) of the species [19] has paved the way for genetics and genomic investigations of the molecular mechanism of sex reversal. Nevertheless, there is still need for functional and physiological studies while the absence of genome information makes QTL studies tedious and laboratory intensive. The existing molecular toolbox, on the other hand provides the possibility to perform comparative genomics analysis in order to delineate candidate regions for the traits of interests. Thus, information coming from other fish species, either model species or economically important species can be mapped onto the existing RH and LG map [20]. In this manner more targeted QTL scan is performed.In the present study we performed comparative analysis via the three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) genome, of gilthead sea bream to two species with different sexuality for which growth-related QTL were detected. The first species is the gonochoristic European sea bass Dicentrarchus labrax (Moronidae); here a QTL for growth was detected at linkage group 1 [21]. The second species, the Asian sea bass Lates calcarifer (Latidae), is like the gilthead sea bream, protandrous hermaphrodite. For the Asian sea bass a QTL for growth was detected at linkage group 2 [22], [23]. In order to select candidate regions from Sparus aurata genome for QTL scanning, we looked for the homologous groups for European seabass LG1 and Asian seabass LG2. In addition the present QTL scan is also linked to the results retrieved through comparative analysis to Tetraodon nigroviridis [20] where a candidate region for sex determination was proposed.Parentage assignment of sea bream progeny (552 fish), using nine microsatellites loci, indicated that 409 individuals (74.6%) were unambiguously assigned to only one pair of parents, 47 individuals (8.5%) showed multiple parental assignment (progeny could be assigned to more than one pair of parents) and 93 individuals (16.9%) showed no assignment due to no match at one or more loci or due the absence of PCR product for these loci. Simulations performed, in order to assess the confidence of parentage assignments, showed that the proportion of correct allocation of parental pairs, using the specific set of loci, was 95%. The resulting pedigree structure from the parental assignment analysis is presented in Table 1. In summary, 10 male and 48 female brooders contributed to a structure of ten paternal half-sib families with 360 males and 49 females. It has to be noted that the percentage of females accounted to originally 3% (62 females out of 2146 offspring). The average body weight (BW) of the 409 individuals was 691.7 g. Male progeny had a mean weight of 697.8 g (132–1055 g) whereas the respective value for the female offspring was slightly lower (647.2 g, in the range 248–1085 g). There was a significant difference between male and female bodyweight (P<0.05). Descriptive statistics for body weight are given in Table 2. Genotyping for the genome scan confirmed to a great extend the parentage assignment using 9 microsatellites with the PAPA software as only 10 offspring out of 419 were excluded from the QTL analysis when the rest of the microsatellite markers were genotyped. Given the 5% allowance for error rate by PAPA, the 2.4% incorrect parentage assignment using 9 microsatellite markers seems to be within the margin allowed by the software.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.t001https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.t002Growth related QTL detected in the European seabass linkage group 1 (DL-LG1) [21] and in the Asian seabass linkage group 2 (LC-LG2) [22], [23] were mapped to stickleback chromosome V (STV) and STII which correspond to sea bream RH groups (SA-RH) 11 and 18 respectively. Moreover, according to comparative mapping results, between linkage and RH maps in sea bream, SA-RH11 corresponds to SA-LG2 and SA-RH18 corresponds to SA-LG 21 (Fig. 1) from the second generation linkage map of S. aurata [20]. Therefore, fourteen microsatellite markers from SA-RH18–SA-LG21 groups (Figs. 1 and 2) and ten microsatellite markers from SA-RH11–SA-LG2 groups were selected for genotyping brooders and their offspring.Sparus aurata radiation hybrid group 18 (RH18, [20]), genetic linkage group 21 (LG21) and homologues found in three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) chromosome STII. Highlighted in bold red are the candidate microsatellite markers linked to growth and sex. Highlighted in bold are the genotyped markers for the QTL analysis.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.g001A. Mapping of QTL for body weight in Sparus aurata LG21: 1. One-QTL model for body weight; 2. Two-QTL model for body weight. B. Mapping of QTL for sex in Sparus aurata LG21: 1. One-QTL model for sex; 2. Two-QTL model for sex.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.g002Twelve out of fourteen genotyped microsatellite markers from S. aurata RH 18-LG21 (Fig. 1) were polymorphic, the remaining two microsatellite markers (Ad24 and Sa41c74) were monomorphic and subsequently removed from the quantitative analysis. The number of alleles for these markers ranged from 3 to 22 (mean  = 9). According to the results of linkage analysis the 12 microsatellites were mapped, as expected, onto the same linkage group (SA-LG21, Fig. 1) with a total length of 32.1 cM. However, exact collinearity of markers between SA-LG21 and SA-RH18 could not be established. The 12 markers are relatively close to each other, showing a mean interval of 2.92 cM.For the SA-RH11-LG2 group, all 10 genotyped microsatellites were polymorphic (2–18 alleles, mean  = 7.1). Linkage analysis confirmed linkage of the above ten markers onto the same linkage group (SA-LG2), with a total length of 64 cM and mean marker interval of 7.09 cM. In addition analysis showed no difference in the loci order of SA-LG21 and SA-LG2 groups in spite of the assumption of different recombination rate between sexes.For eight microsatellite markers, namely Hd46, SAPD00344, Did12, AJ418596, AJ418568, AF478569, SAPD00688 and SAPD00677 located in the region of interest, BAC clones were sequenced, thus genomic information around each marker is available for SNP (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism) detection (Fig. S1). BAC clones sequences are mapped onto stickleback chromosome II and in total 1,325,954 base pairs (bp) are assembled into 307 contigs (∼12 contigs for each BAC). For parts of the two main regions, STII 14 Mb and STII 15 Mb, which have been found to be genetically linked, genome information was obtained based on sequences of 8 (71 contigs) and 5 (26 contigs) overlapping BAC clones (Fig. S2 and S3). The remaining sequences of the other 13 BAC clones were mapped independently over ST II with one BAC clone, breambac-141b24, being re-located on ST XVI instead of ST II.The two regions, in which the two markers Hd46 and Did 12 were found, when mapped on the stickleback, span a genomic region of 1.58 Mb. Considering the genome size difference between stickleback and sea bream this has to be multiplied by a factor of 1.7–2 to estimate the equivalent part of sea bream's genome, which then corresponds to 2.686 Mb, under the hypothesis that there is no chromosome rearrangements in this region. This is useful information, considering that there is no recombination detected in LG21 between Hd46 and Did12 in a panel of 50 individuals (Fig. 1; [16]). Nevertheless, in the actual QTL pedigree, recombination has been detected in this region, showing that this may be a population specific parameter. Such data offer a measure of recombination rate, a parameter that in many cases is affected in a sex specific way and may constitute an indication of sex-related effects. For two microsatellite markers, namely Did12 and breambac-118g4, which were independently genotyped, linkage analysis revealed that they are separated by 1.8 cM from each other (Fig. 1). Sequence analysis showed that they are describing the same locus (Fig. S4).QTL analysis, using half-sib interval mapping [24], revealed a significant QTL controlling body weight (QBW1) at position 20 cM of LG21 (Fig. 2A1). QBW1 is located between Hd46, Eld36 and SaGT1 microsatellite markers and was found to be significant both at 5% and 1% levels of significance and a chromosome-wide scale (Table 3). Moreover, when a two QTL model was fitted, two peaks (QBW2 and QBW3) of the test statistic appeared on LG21 (Fig. 2A2), both significant at the 5% level (Table 3). However, the comparison between the two models (Table 3) suggested that the one-QTL model was of better fit (showing a higher variance ratio). On the other hand, fitting one- and two-QTL models on LG2 showed no significant association between any of the markers and body weight. Test statistics, significance thresholds, mean size of effect and position of detected QTL on LG21 for one and two QTL models are presented in Table 3.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.t003Regarding QTL detection for sex determination, under the assumption of one QTL model, the analysis did not reveal any significant QTL on LG21 (Fig. 2B1, Table 3). However, when a two-QTL model was fitted, two peaks (QS2 and QS3) of the test statistic appeared on LG21 (Fig. 2B2) both significant at the 5% significant level at a chromosome-wide scale (Table 3). The two QTLs are located at position 20 cM of LG21 (Fig. 2), as it was the case for QBW1 affecting body weight and at 6 cM which is 1.1 cM far from marker BMAP54 (Fig. 2). The test statistic for the two-QTL model was quite high (Table 3), despite the low percentage of females in the offspring panel (12%). Finally, QTL analysis in showed no significant QTL associated to sex determination in LG2, using both QTL models.Most methods used for assigning parents to offspring do not provide a 100% confidence of correct assignment, but usually allow between a 1% and 5% level of error, as was the case in the present study. However, such pedigree mistakes result in a small loss of QTL detection power [25] and can be improved when individuals are genotyped with more markers for linkage analysis and QTL mapping purposes. Since the gilthead sea bream is a sequential mass spawner the contribution of 10 male and 48 female brooders to the population structure in the present study was expected [26]. Offsprings were collected at the age of 2 and sexing was performed by stripping. The percentage of females amounted to 3% (62 females out of 2146 offspring). The small presence of females in the progeny was expected, as old males have a much higher potential to go through sex reversal than younger males do, thus at two years of age only a few male individuals have turned into to the female sex. The exact time point of fish changing sex varies. The percentage of females during the second year has been reported to vary from 15% to 80% [10], [27], [28], and in the third year this percentage may increase to 63% [28]. However another study showed that gonadal development is at the end of the second and beginning of the third reproduction cycle [13], emphasizing the population specific behavior of sex reversal. For analysis purposes the structure of ten paternal half-sib families with 360 males (∼88%) and 49 (∼12%) females were chosen.The rapid developments in genomics of fish paved the way to new and valuable research in comparative genetics and genomics. With the accumulation of genomic information in model species, the genetic and genomic characterization for non-model, but economically important species such as the gilthead sea bream, is now feasible. Only recently Massault et al. [29] identified two QTLs for body weight; DL-LG4 and DL-LG6. Corresponding RH groups here are RH 2 and 12, respectively. In seabream recently Massault et al. [29] described a QTL for body length on RH1/LG6 [30]. In addition, the comparison of low coverage gene maps of aquacultured fish species against the fully sequenced fish species enhances the efficiency of candidate genes identification projected for QTL scans for traits of interest. Specifically, the previous study from Sarropoulou et al. [20] demonstrated a well-conserved gene order between SA-RH18 and chromosome 5 of Tetraodon nigroviridis. In this particularly well-conserved region of Tetraodon chromosome 5 the genes for gonadal P450 aromatase (or cyp19a1a) and brain aromatase (or cyp19a1b, neural aromatase, P450aromB) were located [20]; the former is a neural marker of estrogen effect known to be involved in sex differentiation [31], [32], [33], the latter catalyzes the key step in estrogen biosynthesis [34], [35] and is also a neural marker of estrogen effect in teleosts. In addition, SA-RH18 and Tetraodon chromosome 5 correspond to LG1 of tilapia [20], in which a candidate sex-determining region was mapped [36], [37]. Our results, regarding the detection of two sex-linked QTL in SA- LG21 (Fig. 2, Table 3), testify the great power of comparative genomics for targeted QTL scanning.The insufficient genomic information for direct comparison between sea bream the European sea bass and the Asian sea bass, for which growth-related QTL were detected [21], [22], was bridged by comparative mapping through the fully sequenced genome of stickleback. The highest percentages of significant hits by BLAT analysis for S. aurata were obtained by comparing it to the three-spined stickleback (58%), followed by medaka (32%) and Tetraodon (30%) [38]. Thus, stickleback was used as stepping stone that allowed passing from the European and the Asian sea bass linkage groups of interest (DL-LG1 and LC-LG2, respectively) to their gilthead sea bream homologous RH groups (SA-RH11 and SA-RH18, correspondingly). Looking at the biology of both species, the European sea bass is a gonochoristic species with a spawning period between December and March in the Mediterranean and up to June in the Atlantic, whereas the Asian sea bass belongs to the protandrous hermaphrodites [39] like S. aurata, and is a diadromous fish which spawns in estuaries and inhabits rivers. QTL affecting growth-related traits in sea bream was detected in SA-RH18 (LG21; Fig. 2 and Table 3) corresponding to LC-LG2 of Asian seabass. However, no statistical significance for QTL affecting growth-related traits was found in SA-RH11 the corresponding LG of European sea bass (DL-LG1) for which linkage to growth has been shown by Chatziplis et al. [21]. We suggest that targeted QTL scans through comparative genomics can be even more powerful when also taking into account the physiological characters of the examined species.Optimal designs for QTL detection depend on the specific characteristics of a species and, therefore, appropriate designs appropriate for terrestrial livestock species may be not transferable to aquaculture species. A major complication in mass-spawning fish species is that, in general, the effective number of parents is much lower than their total number. Consequently, the contribution of different individuals may extremely vary and in some cases brooders do not even contribute at all [26]. This mode of reproductive behavior is also reflected in our data where, from a panel of 16 males and 109 females brooders, 10 males and 48 females have finally participated to the creation of ten paternal half-sib families with family size ranging from 7 to 115 progeny. On the other hand, simulation studies underline the importance of family structure in experimental design and its major effect on the power to detect QTL [25]. More specifically, when a QTL, explaining 15.5% of the phenotypic variation, is segregating, it was shown that analyzing half-sib family designs with a regression method, a power of 80% for QTL detection can be obtained by using five families with 100 offspring each when a QTL [25], [40]. As a general rule it is suggested to analyze fewer larger families than more families with fewer offspring. In practice, such large and equally sized families are difficult to obtain in mass-spawning species like S. aurata, and it is more likely to have a variety of family sizes due to the unequal contribution of brooders. In the last case, more individuals should be genotyped to ensure lots of offspring per family. However, given the family size and structure in the present study, sufficient power for QTL detection can be assured. In addition the domestication process was in its early phase and since no systematic selective breeding has been operated the populations possess high levels of genetic variation that makes them ideal for QTL detection through full- and/or half-sib families.Seabream is considered a sequential protandrous hermaphrodite species. Karyotype analysis has not revealed the existence of sex chromosomes [41]. Therefore, in the QTL analysis of sex determination (positions 6 and 20 cM on LG21; Fig. 2B2), the sex of the fish was treated as polygenic binary trait scored as one (male) or two (female). The same regression analysis was used for body weight [24], since simulation studies showed that regression methods for QTL mapping are also applicable to binary traits even in unbalanced half-sib family designs [42], [43], [44]. When applying the linear regression method in an unbalanced multi-family half-sib design of 500 progeny and for a 15% incidence of the binary trait, Kadarmideen et al. [42] suggested that a power of 88.4% for QTL detection of binary traits can be obtained at P<0.05 level of significance.Body weight was significantly associated with a QTL (QBW1; Fig. 2A1) in position 20 cM of LG21. QBW1 seems to be tightly linked to body weight, as it was found significant at both 5% and 1% levels of significance at a chromosome-wide scale (Table 3). Furthermore, comparison between the one- and two-QTL models shows that the existence of a single QTL is more likely to be affecting the body weight in the linkage group 21 of S. aurata. The most likely position for QBW1 is between microsatellite markers Hd46, Eld36 and SaGT1 (Figs. 1 and 2A1). BAC sequence data provided here which include mapped microsatellite markers, confirm mapping results, will enable fine mapping of the detected QTL as well as further comparative studies.Elucidation of the full spectrum of processes that lead to sex change in gilthead sea bream requires detailed data derived from physiological, molecular, cytogenetic, genomic and genetic surveys. Up to date, the mechanism of S. aurata sex reversal is thought to be controlled by social activities and group dynamics [10], [11]. Changes in these environmental factors are the signals received by the brain and finally lead to differential expression of specific genes (cyp19a1a [14]) during sex change. Our study provides strong evidence for the presence of genetic control in sex reversal of this teleost fish. The two sex-linked loci detected in SA-LG21 group (QS2 and QS3; Fig. 2) were found significant at the 5% level of significance whilst their variance ratio was also very close to the 1% threshold value (Table 3), despite the imbalanced design comprising 12% of females in the offspring panel. Another noticeable result herein is that QS3 is located at the same position of SA-LG21 (20 cM) as the QBW1 affecting body weight (Table 3). This pleiotropy between QTL could explain partially the genetic correlation between body weight and sex reversal in sea bream, suggested also in Batargias [7] by pedigree-based genetic data analysis (i.e. genetic parameter estimation), and it further supports our hypothesis of genetic control in sex determination apart from environmental factors. In addition the finding of the QTL for weight and the QTL for sex at the same genomic position is in line with newer synthesis about sex determination in fish.In the case of sea bream, it has been shown that the contribution of males to next generation follows a concave distribution [45], [46], and after a certain size it is negatively correlated with weight, showing that there is an evolutionary trade-off between male size and sex reversal. The nature of this interaction is not known, but having defined one possible genomic region where the phenomenon is located, together with the power of new generation sequencing keeps promise for reaching deep insights in the genetics and the evolutionary drivers of sex determination in fish. Our findings combined with results from previous studies may not be limited to this species but could potentially yield further insight into the general phenomenon of hermaphroditism, as this reproduction pattern is observed in a significant number of fish and especially in sparids.In conclusion, we demonstrated a fast and efficient strategy for QTL detection through comparative genomics and linkage analysis. We identified in this way two significant QTLs, one for body weight and one QTL affecting sex determination, both located in linkage group 21. Our results were verified in ten paternal half-sib families comprising of totally 409 progeny. To our best knowledge, this is the first report of QTL detection associated with sex and body weight in Sparus aurata. In addition, we provide BAC sequence information for SNP detection in order to enable fine mapping of QTL as well as comparative studies. Having defined one possible genomic region where linkage to sex determination has been shown together with the power of next generation we expect to obtain access to the molecular basis of nature of sex reversal as well as to the relation of sex reversal and growth.No ethic statement is required for this study. Fish handling was carried out according to the European Union Directive (86/609EEC) for the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes [47] and the “Guidelines for the treatment of animals in behavioural research and teaching” [48], [49].A commercial broodstock of 125 brooders was selected based on prior records of good performance indicating high genetic value. This broodstock consisted of 109 females and 16 males maintained under natural photoperiod. The brooders were allowed to naturally mass spawn in order to obtain relatively lots of families with large family sizes for subsequent genetic parameter estimation and QTL analysis.Natural mass spawning took place in April 2002. The collected eggs originated from a single spawning day. Approximately 1.6 million larvae were collected from the egg incubators and placed into two larval rearing tanks. The larvae stayed for 55 days in tanks, where they were sequentially fed with algae, rotifers and Artemia, and commercial feed. At the age of 55 days post-hatching, each of the larval tanks was transferred to a concrete raceway tank. Only fish from the first concrete raceway tank were used in the experiment while the second was held as a back-up population. Since the fish were originating from the same batch, were growing under identical environmental conditions (same tanks) in all rearing and growing stages of the same time period and were fed the same feed in all periods, there were no fixed effects to take into account. Consequently, there were not any fixed effects present in the experiment. The feeding regimes of differently sized commercial pellets were followed thereafter, including the on-growing period, according to age and weight.Rearing procedure followed the company's common practice with the exception of avoiding the grading in order to preserve the whole spectrum of variance of the population. In September 2002, approximately 70,000 fish with an average weight of 7.21 g, were transferred into a circular tank appropriate for their size and mean weight. In January 2003, approximately 12,000 of the fish above, weighting 31.5 g (average), were transferred to one of the company's cage sites and were again placed in a small cage appropriate for their size and mean weight.In April 2004, 2527 fish were gradually anesthetized with 3-phenoxy-ethanol and each fish was PIT-tagged and fin-clipped, with the fin clip preserved in absolute ethanol for further DNA genotyping. In December 2004, the fish were sampled at the cage site. During this procedure 2146 fish with mean weight of 702 g were gradually anesthetized with 3-phenoxy-ethanol, weighed to the nearest of 1 g, photographed with a Nikon digital camera and sexed by stripping. Sexing by stripping two year old sea bream means that the individuals are classified into three categories: the spermiating males (2029 individuals), indicated by the presence of sperm, the females (62 individuals), indicated by the presence of eggs, and the unidentified (54 individuals), indicated by the absence of both sperm and eggs which were probably immature or mature females, but not in ovulating condition at the time of stripping.Genomic DNA was isolated from fin clips of 125 brooders and 552 offspring from the initial offspring panel (n = 2146), by standard proteinase-K digestion, following the salting out procedure as described in Miller et al. [50]. The selected offspring consisted of 490, randomly selected, male individuals and all the female fish (n = 62, as described above). The quality and quantity of DNA was checked using a NanoDrop 1000 Spectophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). The DNA concentration of each fish was adjusted to 20 ng/µl through dilution with distilled water and arrayed into 96-well PCR plates.For parentage analysis, parents and offspring were genotyped with a multiplex of nine microsatellite markers, from which six (CL2416Contig1, CL120Contig1, cDN14P0004O13.F.ab1, CL2598Contig1, CL2595Contig1, cDN08P0004J06.F) were newly developed and the other three (Dd67, Hd46, Eld36) were from RH 18 (Fig. 1). The selection of the loci set was based on their polymorphism and unambiguously sized PCR product. All multiplex PCRs were performed in 10 µl volumes containing 1 unit of Taq polymerase (GenAxxon, Biberach, Germany), 1× Taq buffer S, 0.25 mM dNTPs mix, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.35 µM of each forward and reverse primer, and approximately 20 ng of template DNA. Cycling conditions for the multiplexes amplification consisted of an initial 95°C denaturation step for 3 min followed by 35 cycles of 30 s at 94°C, 90 s at 57°C, and 60 s at 72°C, with a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. Fluorescently labeled PCR products were separated on an ABI PRISM 3700 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Inc. [ABI], Carlsbad, CA, USA), using 5′-labeled reverse primers and the GeneScanTM-500 LIZ Size Standard (ABI) as internal size standard. Alleles were sized and individuals genotyped using the software STRand 2.3.79 (http://www.vgl.ucdavis.edu/informatics/STRand).Genotype data of brooders and offspring were analyzed using the PAPA 2.0 software [51] for parentage assignment. PAPA calculates the likelihood of each potential parental pair and if one pair has a likelihood greater than that of all the other pairs then the offspring is allocated to this pair. The allocation analysis was run without allowing for mismatching genotypes and simulations were carried out with several iterations and with the same parameter values as those used in the allocation procedure (same set of parental genotypes and same number of parents and offspring), in order to assess the correctness of allocations for parental pairs.All sequences used in the present study were in silico mapped to the stickleback genome sequence using BLAT algorithm. BLAT searches were performed using q = dnax and t = dnax with a score above 80 and an alignment length above 50 bp, as is recommended for mapping ESTs to the genome across species [52]. Genome sequence data for stickleback were retrieved from the draft assembly produced by the Broad Institute at MIT and Harvard in February 2006.Linkage analysis and ordering of the linkage groups were performed using the CRI-MAP 3.0 software [53]. Using the ‘prepare’ option of the software, we also checked for non-Mendelian inheritance. Marker assignment to linkage groups was performed by pairwise analysis, where the marker order with the highest likelihood was selected from all the other possible orders. Linkage groups were built assuming an equal recombination rate between sexes; however, the loci order was also checked (using the ‘Flips’ option of CRI-MAP), assuming different recombination rates between sexes. The linkage distances for sex-average and sex-specific linkage groups was estimated assuming the Kosambi mapping function [54].Twenty-six candidate BAC clones located through in silico comparative mapping to stickleback chromosome II (STII, see Fig. 1) were shotgun-sequenced on a Genome Sequencer FLX 454 Sequencer using a Titanium Library Preparation kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The resulting contigs were manually verified and submitted to GenBank under accession numbers HQ021443–HQ021749. Stickleback STII corresponds to S. aurata RH group 18 [38]. All molecular markers of RH 18 were used to locate their sequence on the sequences resulting from the 26 BAC clones. Markers physically located on one contig or within one BAC were compared to results from the linkage analysis.Given the pedigree structure from the results of the parentage analysis results the QTL detection method was based on half-sib interval mapping analysis as described by Knott et al. [24]. For a given position of one Kosambi centimorgan (cM) interval between the marker genotypes with sex-averaged marker distances, the probability of one offspring inheriting one of its parent's alleles at that position is calculated conditional upon its marker genotype. For any given position these conditional probabilities are the independent variable on which the phenotypic score is regressed. The estimate of the position of the putative QTL is determined by the highest variance ratio and the size of each effect is estimated in that position by the regression coefficient of the analysis [24]. Since the conditional probabilities are available, various genetic and environmental models can be fitted, e.g. effects of environmental factors (fixed effects) or covariates, interactions of QTL with fixed effects etc. No fixed effects were observed in this study; however, it was possible to fit both one and two linked QTL models using sex as random effect when body weight trait was analyzed. The software GridQTL 1.3.2 (see http://www.gridqtl.org.uk) was used to perform the analysis as described by [55]. The 1% and 5% significance threshold values were determined at a chromosome-wide level, for each trait separately, using permutation techniques [56]. The phenotypic data were permutated and analyzed 1000 times and the highest variance ratio was stored after each permutation and analysis. The 10th and 50th highest values after sorting the 1000 variance ratios were the 1% and 5% significance thresholds for each trait, respectively.Assignments of BAC clones to molecular markers mapped onto Sparus aurata RH18 group.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.s001(PDF)Alignment of candidate BAC clone sequences isolated around the candidate molecular marker Hd46 (breambac-141g16) for QTL affecting growth-related traits as well as sex onto the genome of three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus). Numbers on the left columns indicate nucleotide positions along the stickleback chromosome II.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.s002(PDF)Alignment of candidate BAC clone sequences isolated around the candidate region for QTL (Did12, breambac118g4) affecting growth-related traits as well as sex reversal onto the genome of Stickleback. Numbers in the left columns indicate nucleotide positions along the stickleback chromosome II.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.s003(PDF)Alignment of marker sequence Did12 and BAC sequences of Sparus aurata breambac-118g4. In gray are shown the corresponding primer sequences mapped 1.8 cM away from each other according to linkage mapping analysis (Fig. 1).https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016599.s004(PDF)Authors would like to thank Drs. Richard Reinhard and Heiner Kuhl from the Max-Planck Institute Berlin-Dahlem for providing sea bream BAC-end sequences as well as Roche Hellas, namely Magda Vasilakou and Dr. Despina Makri for support of 454 pyrosequencing of BAC clones. Authors also would like to thank the reviewers for their significant comments and suggestions.Conceived and designed the experiments: ES DC GK. Performed the experiments: DL ES. Analyzed the data: DL ES DC. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: CB CST. Wrote the paper: ES DL CST AM DC GK. Contributed to writing the manuscript: APA.PLOS is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) corporation, #C2354500, based in San Francisco, California, US