On this pageResearch Article | Open AccessFoot and mouth disease (FMD) is an important transboundary viral disease of both domestic and wild cloven-hoofed animals characterized by high morbidity with devastating consequence on the livestock worldwide. Despite the endemic nature of FMD in Nigeria, little is known about the epidemiology of the disease at the wildlife-livestock interface level. To address this gap, blood samples were collected between 2013 and 2015 from some wildlife and cattle, respectively, within and around the Yankari Game Reserve and Sumu Wildlife Park in Bauchi State, Nigeria. Wild animals were immobilized using a combination of etorphine hydrochloride (M99® Krüger-Med South Africa) at 0.5–2 mg/kg and azaperone (Stresnil®, Janssen Pharmaceuticals (Pty.) Ltd., South Africa) at 0.1 mg/kg using a Dan-Inject® rifle (Dan-Inject APS, Sellerup Skovvej, Denmark) fitted with a 3 ml dart syringe and for reversal, naltrexone (Trexonil® Kruger-Med South Africa) at 1.5 mg IM was used, and cattle were restrained by the owners for blood collection. Harvested sera from blood were screened for presence of antibodies against the foot and mouth disease virus (FMDV) using the PrioCHECK® 3ABC NSP ELISA kit, and positive samples were serotyped using solid-phase competitive ELISA, (IZSLER Brescia, Italy). Out of the 353 sera collected from cattle and wildlife 197 (65.7%) and 13 (24.5%) (), respectively, tested positive for antibodies to the highly conserved nonstructural 3ABC protein of FMDV by the FMDV-NS blocking ELISA. Classification of cattle into breed and sex showed that detectable antibodies to FMDV were higher () in White Fulani 157 (72.8%) than in Red Bororo 23 (39.7%) and Sokoto Gudali 17 (33.3%) breeds of cattle, whereas in females, detectable FMDV antibodies were higher () 150 (72.8%) than in males 47 (50.0%). In the wildlife species, antibodies to FMDV were detected in the waterbucks 2 (28.6%), elephant 1 (25.0%), wildebeests 4 (33.3%), and elands 6 (25.0%). Four serotypes of FMDV: O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 were detected from the 3ABC positive reactors in waterbucks, elephants, wildebeests, and elands. The results showed presence of antibodies to FMDV in some wildlife and cattle and suggested that wildlife could equally play an important role in the overall epidemiology of FMD in Nigeria. FMD surveillance system, control, and prevention program should be intensified in the study area.Foot and mouth disease (FMD) is one of the most economically important transboundary animal disease in the world caused by foot and mouth disease virus (FMDV), a member of the genus Aphthovirus belonging to the Picornaviridae family [1
]. FMDV is a small nonenveloped virus and has a genome of 8.5 kb which encodes for structural proteins (VP1, VP2, VP3, and VP4) as well as nonstructural proteins (NSPs) [2
, 3
]. A structural protein produces antibodies to FMDV in vaccinated animals, whereas infected animals produce antibodies to both the structural and nonstructural proteins [3
], and assays to demonstrate antibodies against nonstructural proteins have potential to differentiate infected from vaccinated animals [4
–7
]. Seven immunologically different serotypes of the FMDV are known: O, A, C, Asia-1, and South-African Territories (SAT) 1, 2, and 3, which comprise more than 65 subtypes [8
].The transmission of FMDV in sub-Saharan Africa is mainly driven by two epidemiological cycles: one in which wildlife plays a significant role in maintaining and spreading the disease to other susceptible wild and/or domestic ruminants [9
, 10
]. Whilst with the second cycle, the virus is solely transmitted within domestic populations and hence is independent of wildlife [11
]. FMD is currently found in limited areas (small pockets/regions) of Europe and also in Africa, Middle East, and Asia and has contributed to significant declines in wildlife and livestock populations in those regions [12
–15
]. The first reported case of FMD outbreak in Nigeria was in 1924, which was attributed to type O virus [16
]. Subsequently, other serotypes (A, SAT 1, and SAT 2) were reported [17
–22
] and recently SAT 3 serotype [23
].In spite of the annual FMD burden in Nigeria, seroepidemiology and serotyping studies for FMD infections are inadequate. The current trend of FMD occurrence in Nigeria showed that there are regular outbreaks, poor control measures, and lack of enforcement of legislation guiding disease reporting to veterinary authority [24
, 25
]. The presence of antibodies to FMDV in several wildlife species has been documented in studies conducted in different countries of Africa mainly eastern and southern regions [26
–28
]. There has been limited monitoring of infectious diseases like FMD in wildlife in Nigeria. Domestic livestock sometimes do share the same range with wildlife in YGR and SWP in Bauchi State, Nigeria [29
], and there is concern that wildlife may form a reservoir for FMDV. Consequently, there is a need to understand the potential role of wildlife as reservoir of FMDV to aid in the design and implementation of the disease management programs. The aim of the study was to determine the seroprevalence of FMDV in wildlife and cattle and identify circulating FMDV serotypes in wildlife in YGR and SWP in Bauchi State, Nigeria.The study locations were YGR and SWP in Bauchi State, Nigeria (Figures 1 and 2). The YGR covers an area of about 2,244 square kilometers and it is an important refuge for over 50 species of mammals and over 350 species of birds and is one of the few remaining areas where wild animals are protected in their natural habitat in Nigeria [30
, 31
], whereas SWP covers about 40 square kilometer area and harbours species of wildlife including impala (Aepyceros melampus), springbok (Antidorcas marsupialis), oryx (Oryx gazelle), common eland (Taurotragus oryx), zebra (Equus quagga crawshayi), greater kudu (Tragelaphus strepsiceros), blue wildebeest (Connochaetes taurinus), and giraffe (Giraffa camelopardalis) and is located about 60 km north of the state capital, Bauchi [29
].Wildlife samples included elephant (Loxodonta africana), waterbuck (Kobus ellipsiprymus), and hartebeest (Alcelaphus buselaphus caama) from YGR and eland (Taurotragus oryx), kudu (Tragelaphus strepsiceros), and blue wildebeest (Connochaetes taurinus) from SWP. Cattle were sampled from herds of cattle located at the fringes of the YGR and SWP.Wildlife were immobilized for sample collection using a combination of etorphine hydrochloride (M99® Krüger-Med South Africa) at 0.5–2 mg/kg and azaperone (Stresnil®, Janssen Pharmaceuticals (Pty.) Ltd., South Africa) at 0.1 mg/kg delivered intramuscularly (IM) from a distance of about 25 meters on ground in a 3 ml dart syringe fitted with barbed needles using a Dan-Inject® rifle (Dan-Inject APS, Sellerup Skovvej, Denmark). Cattle were restrained by the owners for sample collection. Ten mililitres of blood samples were collected from the jugular vein of each animal and dispensed into plain vacutainer bottles. All samples were transported in a cold box with ice packs to the National Veterinary Research Institute Laboratory, Bauchi. The serum samples were harvested from the blood into cryovials after spinning for 10 min at 1200 g and were divided into aliquots, labelled, and kept at −20°C until used.The ELISA was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (PRIOCHECK® FMD-3ABC NS protein ELISA) for detection of antibodies to the nonstructural polypeptide 3ABC of FMDV in serum which detects infected animals regardless of their vaccination status and the FMDV serotype that caused the infection [32
]. Briefly, 80 μl of the ELISA buffer and 20 μl of the test sera were added to the 3ABC antigen-coated test plates. Negative, weak positive, and strong positive control sera were added to designated wells on each test plate, gently shaken, and incubated overnight (18 h) at 22°C. The plates were then emptied and washed six times with 200 μl of wash solution, and 100 μl of diluted conjugate was added to all wells. The test plates were sealed and incubated for one hour at 22°C. The plates were then washed six times with 200 μl of wash solution, and 100 μl of the chromogen (tetramethylbenzidine) substrate was dispensed to all wells of the plates and incubated for 20 min at 22°C following which 100 μl of the stop solution was added to all the wells and mixed gently. Readings were taken on a spectrophotometer Multiskan® ELISA reader (Thermo Scientific, USA) at 450 nm, and the OD 450 values of all samples were expressed as percentage inhibition (PI) relative to the OD 450 max using the following formula PI = 100 − [OD 450 test sample/OD450 max] × 100. Samples with PI = ≥50% were considered positive for the FMD antibody, while those with PI <50% were declared negative for the FMD antibody. Since the 3ABC ELISA for FMD was = 100% specific and >99% sensitive, the percentage prevalence was taken as true prevalence.The 3ABC ELISA positive serum samples were analyzed for FMD-specific antibodies using a solid-phase competitive ELISA (SPCE) as previously described for serotypes O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 [32
, 33
]. The assays were performed using antibodies FMDV ELISA kits for serotypes O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 produced by IZSLER Biotechnology Laboratory (Italy). Briefly, 96 wells precoated with FMDV antigens captured by FMD serotypes O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 in specific MAb flat-bottomed plates were used. Four dilutions of sera at 1/10, 1/30, 1/90, and 1/270 were made. Without washing, the conjugate (horse-radish peroxidase) was added and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The plate was washed, and the substrate/chromogen solution (tetramethylbenzidine) was added and kept in the dark for 20 min. The reaction was stopped by the addition of a stop solution, and the plates were read on a MultiSkan® spectrophotometer ELISA plate reader (Thermo Scientific, USA) at 450 nm wavelength. Serum endpoint titre was expressed as the highest dilution producing 50% inhibition, with serum having endpoint titre ≥50% being classified as positive for the specific FMD antibody.Data obtained were analyzed using Graphpad Prism version 7. Results were summarized in tables and expressed as percentages and levels of association between positivity and sex, breed, and age, and animal species were derived using chi-square. Values of were regarded as statistically significantly different.Overall seroprevalence of FMDV in wildlife was 24.5% (Table 1). Detectable antibodies to FMDV were observed in the waterbuck 28.6%, elephant 25.00 %, wildebeest 33.3%, and eland 25.0 %Comparison of the overall seroprevalences of FMDV at the wildlife-cattle interface (Table 2) showed that detectable antibodies to FMDV were significantly higher () in cattle 65.67% than in wildlife 24.0%.Antibodies to FMDV were significantly higher in female cattle than males (P <0.05) with Bunaji breed of cattle having a high risk factor (odds ratio >5) of exposure to FMDV than the other breeds of cattle examined (Table 3).The detectable antibodies to the FMD serotype were for serotypes O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 in waterbuck, wildebeest, and eland, whereas antibodies to serotypes A and SAT 2 were detected in elephants. Each of the serotypes A and SAT 1 was shown to have highest reactors of 18.87%, whereas serotype O had the least reactor of 13.21% (Table 4).The results of this study have shown that antibodies to FMDV were present in cattle (65.7%) and wildlife (24.5%). This is consistent with results of previous survey for FMDV antibodies in Nigeria in which a seroprevalence of 75.11% was reported in a study conducted in cattle in Kwara State [34
]. Also, seroprevalences of 64.3% and 70.98%, respectively, were reported in studies carried out in Plateau State [35
, 36
] and 64.7% in a study conducted at the border states in Nigeria [21
, 37
]. The similarities of findings of the present study with previous studies have shown that FMD is still an enzootic disease in Nigeria, and this could be attributed to the lack of FMD vaccination campaigns in Nigeria [21
, 37
]. There is unrestricted herds mobility, continuous contact, and intermingling of different cattle herds at water points, communal grazing areas, and porous borders.The higher FMDV seroprevalence in female cattle during this study was consistent with the findings of other investigators [34
, 37
] which reported a risk difference in association with sex during FMDV studies in Kwara and Plateau states, Nigeria, respectively. Similarly, high incidence of FMDV in females in Northwest Ethiopia was reported [38
]. However, most of the cattle sampled during the study were females as opposed to males. The significant association of seroprevalence with sex could be attributed to the preference for females to males by the nomads for reproductive purposes and milk production, and therefore females are kept for a longer period thereby having higher risk of exposure than males [8
, 34
, 37
]. Significant association in seropositivity was observed in the Bunaji breed of cattle, and this could be due to small number of other breeds (Sokoto Gudali and Red Bororo) sampled. However, all the breeds of cattle are equally at risk.Results from the study have shown that antibodies to FMDV were present in elands, wildebeests, waterbucks, and elephants. This finding being the first of its kind in the study area reveals that FMD could be a problem in wildlife in Nigeria. This is not surprising as FMD is endemic in Nigeria [18
, 20
, 23
, 39
]. Presence of wildlife population along the national park in Borgu, Niger State, Nigeria, where cloven-hoofed species come in contact with livestock was shown to be the probable exposure factor that contributed to high FMD seropositivity in livestock observed in the area [37
]. The results from this study corroborate with other studies in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Botswana, Namibia, India, Chad, and Iran that demonstrated FMDV antibodies in wildlife [10
, 11
, 28
, 40
–45
]. High FMDV prevalence in waterbucks observed in this study reflects their ecology and living ecosystem which is consistent with other findings in East Africa and Zimbabwe [27
, 41
, 46
]. The study hitherto provided a picture of FMDV distribution in wildlife in Bauchi State, Nigeria, which was observed to be largely understudied [44
].This study confirms the presence of an antibody to FMDV serotypes O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 in wildlife, a finding which is first of its kind in Bauchi State, Nigeria. Reported outbreaks affecting livestock of West Africa since 2000 were caused by FMDV types O, A, and SAT 2 [44
]. Similarly, FMDV serotypes O, A, and SAT 2 were the cause of most reported outbreaks in domestic livestock in Nigeria from 2010 to 2016 [22
, 34
, 39
]. The result here showed that FMDV serotypes observed in wildlife were equally previously observed in domestic livestock. The possible source of FMDV serotypes infection for the wildlife could be from infected livestock interacting with wildlife in the same environment. Transmission of FMDV between wildlife and livestock, even in isolated areas, may be due to windborne infection or via fomites [47
, 48
]. Wildlife species often congregate at the natural “salt lick” point in YGR [31
]; similarly, artificial salt lick points are also available in SWP. Therefore, dissemination of the FMDV during wildlife activities at the salt lick points is possible. Previous studies have shown that FMDV can easily be disseminated in the soil and can persist in that environment for a long period [28
].The presence of FMDV antibodies in wildlife and cattle in this study might be driven by direct contact at the wildlife-livestock interface through sharing of water and pasture resources which is observed to be a common activity in YGR and SWP in Bauchi State, Nigeria [29
, 31
]. During dry season, wildlife and livestock in the study area do closely congregate at feed and water points thus increasing the transmission likelihood of water-related infections like FMD [13
, 41
, 44
]. Studies conducted in Ethiopia and Zimbabwe found significant association between cattle exposed to FMDV and their contact history with wildlife [11
, 48
, 49
]. It is unfortunate that due to the endemic nature of FMD in Nigeria that outbreaks are not being investigated to determine the primary source, and hence the disease has continued to be a scourge to livestock production in the country.Presence of FMDV antibodies in both cattle and some wildlife was observed. Also, four serotypes of FMDV: O, A, SAT 1, and SAT 2 previously detected in cattle in Nigeria were observed for the first time among some wildlife species in the study area. The study highlights the implication of continuous spread of FMD due to access to resources like water and grazing areas shared by wildlife and livestock in the study area. This is a threat to livestock production and wildlife conservation goals, and hence there is a need for adapting livestock and or wildlife management practices that will reduce the frequency of disease transmission at the wildlife and livestock contact. Further studies are needed to isolate and characterize the FMD-circulating virus in wild and domestic animals from the study area.All relevant data are included in the tables, and should there be need of any additional data, they will be provided accordingly.The authors have declared that there are no conflicts of interest.The authors would like to thank the wildlife capture team and game rangers from Yankari Game Reserve and Sumu Wildlife Park in Bauchi State, Nigeria, for their cooperation and support during sample collection.Copyright © 2020 Y. J. Atuman et al. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.We are committed to sharing findings related to COVID-19 as quickly as possible. We will be providing unlimited waivers of publication charges for accepted research articles as well as case reports and case series related to COVID-19. Review articles are excluded from this waiver policy. Sign up here as a reviewer to help fast-track new submissions.By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.Working off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsX monosomy is the most common disorder of sex development in horses. Although cytogenetic analysis is still the gold standard in the diagnosis of equine X monosomy, novel molecular techniques are being sought to quickly and reliably detect this chromosome abnormality.The goal of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of a novel variant of the PCR technique—namely, droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)—in the detection of X monosomy in mares.A proof of concept of the usefulness of ddPCR in diagnosing an abnormal number of X chromosomes in mares.We examined an infertile mare using cytogenetic (fluorescent in situ hybridisation—FISH) and molecular (droplet digital PCR—ddPCR) techniques. The X chromosome copy number in ddPCR was estimated via detection of the AMELX gene copy number. In addition, 70 mares homozygous for X‐linked microsatellite marker (LEX3) were examined by ddPCR. For all mares, a PCR search for the Y‐linked SRY gene was also performed.Cytogenetic analysis and ddPCR gave concordant results, indicating pure X monosomy in the studied mare. Of the 70 additional mares examined by ddPCR, a single copy of the X chromosome was found in two cases. All mares were SRY‐negative and thus both freemartinism, manifested by leucocyte XX/XY chimerism, and sex reversal syndrome (XX, SRY‐positive) could be excluded.The ddPCR approach does not allow for unequivocal identification of mosaicism (63,X/64,XX or 65,XXX/64,XX), but may give an indication that further cytogenetic analysis is necessary.The ddPCR approach appeared to be useful for diagnosing nonmosaic X monosomy in mares. If the number of X chromosome copies in a mare, as determined by ddPCR, differs from two (in our study, <1.8 or >2.2), additional cytogenetic investigation is recommended with the aim of detecting the mosaicism.Volume52, Issue4July 2020Pages 627-631© 2019 EVJ LtdContact UsMulberry House,
31 Market Street, Fordham,
Ely, Cambridgeshire,
CB7 5LQ
Email: info@beva.org.ukInterleukin-6 (IL-6) decreases adrenal androgen release from bovine zona reticularis (ZR).IL-6 decreases expression of messenger RNA and protein for ZR steroidogenic proteins.IL-6 modifies expression of ZR nuclear factors that control steroidogenic proteins.Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is secreted by adrenocortical cells and modifies cortisol secretion. In this study, the effects of IL-6 on adrenal androgen release were investigated. The zona reticularis (ZR) was generally isolated from bovine adrenal glands by dissection. In select experiments, the intact adrenal cortex (ie, all 3 adrenocortical zones) was dissected from the adrenal glands. For androgen release experiments, ZR and intact adrenocortical cubes were dispersed into isolated cells, the cells cultured and exposed to IL-6 and/or adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and androgen release determined by radioimmunoassay. Basal and ACTH-stimulated androgen release from the ZR was inhibited by IL-6 in a concentration-dependent (10–1000 pg/mL) and time-dependent (4–24 h) manner (P < 0.01 by 1-way analysis of variance and the Bonferroni test). In contrast, IL-6 increased basal and ACTH-stimulated androgen release from mixed adrenocortical cells (P < 0.01). The mechanism of IL-6 inhibition of androgen release was investigated by exposing ZR strips to IL-6 and measuring the expression of the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein of steroidogenic factors. Basal and ACTH-stimulated expression of the mRNA and protein for steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme, 3-β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, steroid 17-α-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase/17,20 desmolase, and the nuclear factor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1), that stimulates steroidogenesis, were decreased by IL-6 (P < 0.01). In contrast IL-6 increased the mRNA and protein for dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1 (DAX-1), a nuclear factor that inhibits steroidogenesis (P < 0.01). In summary, IL-6 decreased androgen release and the expression of steroidogenic factors in the ZR, and this decrease may be mediated in part through increasing DAX-1 and decreasing SF-1.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.2012 Volume 58 Issue 6 Pages 654-660(compatible with EndNote, Reference Manager, ProCite, RefWorks)(compatible with BibDesk, LaTeX)During mammalian sex determination of XY fetuses, SRY induces SOX9 in Sertoli cells, resulting in formation of testes with seminiferous tubules, interstitial Leydig cells and peritubular myoid cells. Meanwhile XX fetuses without SRY develop ovaries. In cattle, most XX heifers born with a male twin, so-called freemartins, develop nonfunctioning ovaries and genitalia with an intersex phenotype. Interestingly, freemartins sometimes develop highly masculinized gonads with seminiferous tubule-like structures despite the absence of SRY. However, in these cases, the degree of masculinization in each gonadal somatic cell type is unclear. Here, we report a rare case of a freemartin Japanese black calf with almost complete XX sexreversal. Gross anatomical analysis of this calf revealed the presence of a pair of small testis-like gonads with rudimentary epididymides, in addition to highly masculinized genitalia including a pampiniform plexus, scrotum and vesicular gland. Histological and immunohistochemical analyses of these masculinized gonads revealed well-defined seminiferous tubule-like structures throughout the whole gonadal parenchyma. In epithelia of these tubules, SOX9-positive supporting cells (i.e., Sertoli cells) were found to be arranged regularly along the bases of tubules, and they were also positive for GDNF, one of the major factors for spermatogenesis. 3β-HSD-positive cells (i.e., Leydig cells) and SMA-positive peritubular myoid cells were also identified around tubules. Therefore, for the first time, we found the transdifferentiation of ovarian somatic cells into all testicular somatic cell types in the XX freemartin gonads. These data strongly support the idea of a high sexual plasticity in the ovarian somatic cells of mammalian gonads.Kiyoshi KIKUCHI, Sho HOSOYA, Satoshi TASUMI. Sex determination in fish. The Journal of Animal Genetics. 2013, Vol.41, No.1, p.37.JoonHyuk SOHN, Motoki SASAKI, Masahiro YASUDA, et al. Immunolocalization of Cytoskeletal Proteins in the Testes of Two Asian Cervids: Water Deer (Hydropotes inermis) and Reeves’ Muntjac (Muntiacus reevesi). Journal of Veterinary Medical Science. 2013, Vol.75, No.8, p.1071.J.G. Remnant, R.G. Lea, C.E. Allen, et al. Novel gonadal characteristics in an aged bovine freemartin. Animal Reproduction Science. 2014, Vol.146, No.1-2, p.1.K Tang, L Wang, Y Jin, et al. GDF9 affects the development and tight junction functions of immature bovine Sertoli cells. Reproduction in Domestic Animals. 2017, Vol.52, No.4, p.640.Qinghua Qiu, Taoqi Shao, Yang He, et al. Applying real-time quantitative PCR to diagnosis of freemartin in Holstein cattle by quantifying SRY gene: a comparison experiment. PeerJ. 2018, Vol.6, p.e4616.Kento Miura, Kyoko Harikae, Mayu Nakaguchi, et al. Molecular and genetic characterization of partial masculinization in embryonic ovaries grafted into male nude mice. PLoS ONE. 2019, Vol.14, No.3, p.e0212367.Anna Kozubska-Sobocińska, Grzegorz Smołucha, Barbara Danielak-Czech. Early Diagnostics of Freemartinism in Polish Holstein-Friesian Female Calves. Animals. 2019, Vol.9, No.11, p.971.Maike Rohländer, Henning Otzen, Kristina Rode, et al. Histological Comparison of Testicular Needle Biopsy and En Bloc Samples in Abattoir Calves. Animals. 2020, Vol.10, No.5, p.918.The Japanese journal of animal reproductionThe Japanese journal of animal reproductionAlready have an account? Login in hereWorking off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsJin S‐M, Shin JS, Kim KS, Gong C‐H, Park SK, Kim J‐S, Yeom S‐C, Hwang ES, Lee CT, Kim S‐J, Park C‐G. Islet isolation from adult designated pathogen‐free pigs: use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes and a revised donor selection strategy would improve the islet graft function. Xenotransplantation 2011; 18: 369–379. © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.Abstract: Background: In clinical trials using adult porcine islet products, islets should be isolated from the designated pathogen‐free (DPF) pigs under the current good manufacturing practice (GMP) regulations. Our previous studies suggested that male DPF pigs are better donors than retired breeder pigs and histomorphometrical parameters of donor pancreas predict the porcine islet quality. We aimed to investigate whether the use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes and a revised donor selection strategy could improve the islet graft function in the context of islet isolation with DPF pigs.Methods: Using 30 DPF pigs within a closed herd, we compared the islet yield of porcine islets isolated with Liberase PI (n = 11, as a historical control group), Liberase MTF C/T, which is a GMP‐grade enzyme (n = 12), and CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease (n = 7). We analyzed the relationship between the diabetes reversal rate of recipient NOD/SCID mice (n = 75) and histomorphometric parameters of each donor pancreas as well as donor characteristics.Results: Proportion of islets larger than 200 μm from the biopsied donor pancreas (P = 0.006) better predicted islet yield than age (P = 0.760) or body weight (P = 0.371) of donor. The proportion of islets larger than 200 μm from the biopsied donor pancreas was not related to the sex of the donor miniature pig (P = 0.358). The islet yield obtained with the three enzymes did not differ, even after stratification of the donor with the histomorphometric parameters of the biopsied donor pancreas and the sex of donor. The use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes (P < 0.001), a higher proportion of large islets in donor pancreas (P = 0.006), and a male sex of the donor (P = 0.025) were independent predictors of earlier diabetes reversal.Conclusions: Use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes including a GMP‐grade enzyme resulted in better islet quality than that of islet isolated using Liberase PI. To obtain high‐quality islet from DPF pigs, the donor should be male pig and histomorphometrical parameters from donor pancreas should be considered.The source animals in clinical trials of islet xenotransplantation have been confined to fetal or neonatal pigs [1]. However, evidence of successful long‐term adult porcine islet graft survival in non‐human primates has been achieved by several groups [2-5] and implies that a clinical trial of adult pig‐to‐human islet xenotransplantation could be initiated in the near future. To conduct a clinical trial using porcine islet products, the source animals must be designated pathogen‐free (DPF) pigs [6]. In addition, the islet product should be manufactured under current good manufacturing practice (cGMP) regulations [7]. To meet the cGMP regulation, the use of enzyme containing the bovine nervous tissue would be inappropriate in most countries. However, most studies on porcine islet isolation have been performed with Liberase PI, which is no more available due to the safety issue. Furthermore, the recent bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes have another benefit such as less degradation of class I collagenase (C1) component [8, 9], and some of them are manufactured under cGMP regulation with extremely low endotoxin content. Given the well‐known fragility of the porcine islets, these improvements might enable the isolation of porcine islet with better quality. Therefore, the establishment of porcine islet isolation using both DPF miniature pigs and the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes would be an important progress toward clinical porcine islet xenotransplantation.Another requirement for conducting a clinical trial using porcine islets is the revision of the donor selection criteria, because retired breeder pigs from slaughterhouse are not adequate for clinical islet xenotransplantation. Our previous data suggested that female retired breeder miniature pigs are not the best donor in islet isolation with specific pathogen‐free pigs [10]. Instead, uncastrated male donor miniature pigs of advanced age (>24 months) are associated with favorable islet isolation yield [10]. However, this study did not assess the quality of islet, and it has been still unknown whether the quality from male donor miniature pigs is better than that from female retired breeder miniature pigs. Recently, we reported that histomorphometric parameters obtained from biopsied donor pancreatic tissue and flow cytometry analysis predicted the porcine islet quality [11]. However, most donor pigs used were adult market pigs, of which detailed donor characteristics such as age, sex, and body weight were not available. Therefore, it is unknown whether the histomorphometric parameters obtained from biopsied donor pancreas still have an additional role in the donor selection strategy for porcine islet isolation using a DPF miniature pigs [10].Therefore, we aimed to investigate whether the use of the newer bovine tissue–free enzymes and a revised donor selection strategy could improve the islet graft function in the context of islet isolation with DPF miniature pigs.For all porcine islet isolation in this study, Seoul National University (SNU) miniature pigs [10] bred in a barrier‐sustained, specific pathogen‐free facility (n = 30) were used. For this closed herd, microbiological examination for 41 viral pathogen (Table 1), 35 bacterial pathogens, 2 fungal pathogens, and 25 parasites specified according to the previous study [12] was conducted; the DPF pigs were negative for all tests. This was a primary indication that SNU miniature pigs had DPF status [12]. All the SNU miniature pigs have been tested for the presence and activity of porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV) types A, B, and C by reverse transcriptase (RT)‐polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PERV types A, B, and C were present in the genome of all SNU miniature pigs. However, in vitro reverse transcription assay and in vivo monitoring of transplanted animals showed no reverse transcription activity of PERV (data not shown). Among the 30 SNU miniature pigs in this study, 10 were female (breeder, n = 6; virgin, n = 4). The median age of the 30 pigs was 33.5 months [interquartile range (IQR), 24 to 42.5; range, 14 to 63]. For the assessment of in vivo islet potency, NOD/SCID mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) up to 27 weeks of age were used. All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Seoul National University Hospital.For the SNU miniature pigs, total pancreatectomies were performed in a sterile operating room. The surgical procedure was performed identically throughout the study period and is described elsewhere [10]. A histomorphometric analysis of frozen sections of biopsied pancreas [11] was performed for all samples. This method and the definitions of each histomorphometric parameter have been described elsewhere [11]. Briefly, a small piece of tissue was obtained from the junction of the duodenal and splenic lobes of the pancreas right after pancreatectomy at the operating room. Three frozen sections were stained with dithizone, and we quantified each histomorphometrical parameter using the captured images of entire non‐overlapping areas 1 cm2 in area.After transportation, islet isolation was performed using the modified Ricordi method that has been previously described [11]. For 11 SNU miniature pigs, Liberase PI (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) was used for pancreatic digestion. The harvested pancreas was distended intraductally using a preservation solution containing 3.3 mg/ml Liberase PI (Roche Diagnostics) at a proportion of 1.0 ml of preservation solution per gram of tissue. For 19 SNU miniature pigs, various combinations of Liberase MTF C/T (Roche Diagnostics; SNU miniature pigs, n = 12) or CIzyme collagenase MA and CIzyme BP protease (VitaCyte, Indianapolis, IN, USA; SNU miniature pigs, n = 7) were used for pancreatic digestion. The amount of enzyme used for each islet isolation experiment was recorded in terms of proportion of the vial that was used. The certificates of analysis that contain the collagenase activity, in terms of Wünsch units or total collagen‐degrading activity (CDA), and neutral protease activity for each vial of enzyme were provided by the manufacturers. We calculated the enzyme doses for each islet isolation experiment using the following formula: (amount of enzyme used for each islet isolation experiment in vial) × (enzyme activity for one vial on the certificate of analysis). According to this calculation method, the collagenase component of Liberase MTF C/T (Roche Diagnostics) was used at a median dose of 39.0 Wünsch units per gram of pancreatic tissue (IQR, 30.8 to 44.1; range, 13.2 to 48.54) for islet isolation from DPF SNU miniature pigs. The thermolysin component of Liberase MTF C/T (Roche Diagnostics) was used at a median dose of 1562.5 neutral protease activity units per gram of pancreatic tissue (IQR, 1458.1 to 1627.9; range, 330.0 to 1892.4) for islet isolation from DPF SNU miniature pigs. For each islet isolation experiment, we calculated the neutral protease/collagenase activity ratio (NP/C ratio) with the following equation: the dose of neutral protease activity units per gram of pancreatic tissue/the dose of collagenase in Wünsch units per gram of pancreatic tissue. The median NP/C ratio was 39.0 neutral protease activity units per Wünsch unit (IQR, 36.4 to 42.7; range 25.0 to 60.1). The dosage of Liberase MTF C/T was determined empirically based on our preliminary experiments with pancreata from slaughterhouse pigs (data not shown). The lot numbers of Liberase MTF C/T were 15 411 800 (n = 7), 11 181 900 (n = 1), 11 525 300 (n = 2), and 12 014 800 (n = 2). The median dose of CIzyme collagenase MA (VitaCyte) used in this study was 0.12 CDA per gram of pancreatic tissue (range, 0.10 to 0.12). The median dose of CIzyme BP protease (VitaCyte) in this study was 0.03 million neutral protease activity units per gram pancreas mass (range, 0.02 to 0.03). The neutral protease activity was measured using FITC‐casein and FITC‐BSA as substrate, for thermolysin (Roche diagnostics) and BP protease (VtaCyte), respectively. The lot numbers of the CIzyme collagenase MA (VitaCyte) and CIzyme BP protease (VitaCyte) enzymes used in this study were 100 129 and 100 413, respectively. All of the enzymes were used within the expiration dates provided by the manufacturers. The collagenase and neutral protease components of each enzyme were separately reconstituted with pyrogen‐free water, according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. After complete dissolution, the combined collagenase and neutral protease components of each enzyme were diluted to a total volume of 1 ml per gram of pancreatic tissue with a preservation solution at 4 °C and intraductally administered. The preservation solution was composed of 15 μm sodium hydroxide (Sigma‐Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA), 5.8 mm potassium hydroxide (Sigma‐Aldrich), 1 mm calcium chloride (Sigma‐Aldrich), 800 μm magnesium sulfate (Sigma‐Aldrich), 29 mm sodium phosphate (Sigma‐Aldrich), 30 mm d‐mannitol (Sigma‐Aldrich), and 105 mm sodium chloride (Sigma‐Aldrich). During digestion, pancreatic tissue injected with collagenase was incubated without shaking for 12 to 15 min at 35 to 37 °C until the pancreatic tissue was loosened, followed by manual shaking under serial sampling. After free islets were observed in the serial sample, digestion was stopped by cooling to 4 °C and exposure to 10% porcine serum. Islets were purified using a continuous OptiPrep density gradient (Axis‐Shield, Oslo, Norway) and a Cobe 2991 cell separator (Gambro BCT Inc., Lakewood, CO, USA). Purified islets were cultured overnight in Medium 199 (Gibco, BRL, Life Technologies Ltd, Paisley, UK) supplemented with 10% porcine serum, 10 mm nicotinamide (Sigma‐Aldrich), and 1% penicillin–streptomycin at 37 °C.The study period was from April 2008 to March 2009 for the Liberase PI group, from June 2009 to October 2010 for Liberase MTF C/T group, and from January 2010 to August 2010 for CIzyme MA/BP group. Therefore, the Liberase PI group was a historical control.The beta‐cell viability index of islets cultured overnight was determined using flow cytometry because this method had been used to predict the post‐transplant outcomes in our previous study [11]. This method has been described elsewhere [13]. Briefly, the proportion of zinc‐binding beta cells among islet cells was assessed by incubating cells with 500 nm FluoZin‐3 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 30 min at 37 °C [14]. Mitochondrial membrane potential was assessed by incubating cells with 50 nm tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester (TMRE; Invitrogen) for 30 min at 37 °C [15]. The beta‐cell fractional viability was defined as the proportion of TMRE‐positive cells among the FluoZin‐3–positive cells. The beta‐cell viability index was defined using the following formula: (proportion of FluoZin‐3–positive cells) × (beta‐cell fractional viability).After overnight culture, 2500 IEQs of isolated islets per recipient were transplanted under the renal capsules of two to four streptozotocin‐induced diabetic NOD/SCID mice. The dose of streptozotocin was 100 mg/kg and was administered by intraperitoneal injection. Mice were regarded as diabetic when two consecutive blood glucose level readings were higher than 300 mg/dl. Each islet transplantation was performed at about 1 week after induction of diabetes with streptozotocin.After islet transplantation, random blood glucose level measurements were taken twice a week. The cutoff for normoglycemia was 200 mg/dl. Diabetes reversal was defined as two consecutive non‐fasting blood glucose levels below 200 mg/dl that then increased above 300 mg/dl after the removal of a graft‐bearing kidney at >56 days after islet transplantation. For survival analysis, we analyzed the diabetes reversal rate of 75 individual recipient NOD/SCID mice (Liberase PI, n = 14; Liberase MTF C/T, n = 36; CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease, n = 24) transplanted with islets isolated from 23 donor pigs (Liberase PI, n = 4; Liberase MTF C/T, n = 12; CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease, n = 7).Data from each group were presented as median values with IQR. Continuous variables of two groups were compared using the Mann–Whitney U test. Continuous variables of three groups were compared using the non‐parametric Kruskal–Wallis test. When the P‐value of the Kruskal–Wallis test was <0.05, post hoc testing was performed using the Wilcoxon rank sum test with an adjusted level of significance according to the Bonferroni method. Therefore, a P‐value of <0.016 was considered statistically significant in the post hoc test. ROC analysis was performed to evaluate the predictive value of each factor for the successful islet isolation yield. The successful islet isolation yield was defined as post‐culture islet yield of >125 000 IEQ per pig, which enables the transplantation of >25 000 IEQ/kg of islet into 5‐kg‐sized non‐human primate. We performed Kaplan–Meier survival analysis to compare the diabetes reversal rates of each group, and the difference between groups was determined by log rank test. For multivariate analysis, a Cox regression model was used for the identification of independent predictors of the diabetes reversal rate. A P‐value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant except in the post hoc test using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. All analyses were performed using SPSS version 18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).Before comparison of the islet isolation yield with Liberase PI, Liberase MTF C/T, and CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease, we determined which factors are associated with higher islet isolation yield and whether there is a correlation among such factors. We compared the predictive value of several histomorphometric parameters obtained from biopsied donor pancreatic tissue [11] for the prediction of a successful islet isolation yield (data not shown). Unlike in pigs from multiple strains [11], the proportion of islets larger than 200 μm in diameter best predicted post‐culture islet yield (R2 = 0.213, P = 0.010; Fig. 1A). Therefore, we further examined the association between this histomorphometric parameters and the donor factors previously reported to predict islet yield, which include age, body weight, and sex [10]. The proportion of islets larger than 200 μm in diameter was not associated with the age of the donor (Fig. 1B). The proportion was associated with the body weight of the donor (P = 0.008, Fig. 1C), which better predicted islet yield [area under the curve (AUC) 0.802, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.629 to 0.976; P = 0.006] than age (AUC 0.533, 95% CI 0.318 to 0.749; P = 0.760) or body weight of donor (AUC 0.598, 95% CI 0.386 to 0.809; P = 0.371) in the ROC analysis (Fig. 1D). In addition, post‐culture islet yield per miniature pig tended to be higher in male donor miniature pigs, but this difference did not reach statistical significance (P = 0.052, Fig. 1E). The proportion of islets larger than 200 μm in diameter was not related to the sex of the donor miniature pig (P = 0.358, Fig. 1F). In summary, proportion of islets larger than 200 μm in diameter in biopsied donor pancreas was the most significant factor associated with higher islet isolation yield, and it was independent from the sex of the donor miniature pig.Predictors of islet yield in islet isolation using DPF SNU miniature pigs. (A) Correlation of the proportions of large (>200 μm in diameter) islets with total post‐culture islet yield per pig. (B, C) Correlation of the proportion of large (>200 μm in diameter) islets with age (B) or body weight (C) of the donor. (D) Predictive value of age, body weight, and proportion of large (>200 μm in diameter) islets for the prediction of post‐culture islet yield per pig >125 000 IEQ evaluated by receiver‐operator characteristics analysis. (E) Post‐culture islet yield per pig for female and male pigs. (F) Proportion of large (>200 μm in diameter) islets obtained from donor pancreatic tissues of female and male pigs. Error bar represents the median and interquartile range. DPF, designated pathogen‐free.Islet yield per pancreas weight after purification, total post‐purification islet yield per pig, and total post‐culture islet yield per pig obtained with Liberase MTF C/T were comparable with those observed with other enzymes (P > 0.05 in all analysis by Kruskal–Wallis test, Table 2). Islet survival rate during overnight culture was higher in the Liberase MTF C/T group than in the Liberase PI group (P = 0.011, Table 2), and cold ischemia time of Liberase MTF C/T group was shorter than that of the Liberase PI group (P = 0.007). Because donor sex and proportion of large (>200 μm in diameter) islet in biopsied pancreas could confound the comparison among each enzyme group, we further analyzed this issue within each subgroup stratified by the histomorphometric parameters of the donor pancreas and sex of the donor. In this analysis, the islet isolation yield obtained with Liberase MTF C/T was comparable to those of other enzymes for the donor pancreas subgroup that had ≥8.9% of islets larger than 200 μm in diameter (Fig. 2A; the cutoff value of 8.9% was the point at which the value of sensitivity plus specificity was the highest.) and the male donor subgroup (Fig. 2B).Islet yield for each enzyme in (A) donors with a >8.9% proportion of large (>200 μm in diameter) islets and (B) male donors. Error bar represents the median and interquartile range.Because the proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets in the histomorphometric analysis of biopsied donor pancreata showed a correlation with diabetes reversal in recipient NOD/SCID mice in our previous study using various strains of pigs [11], we examined the association between this proportion and donor characteristics in DPF miniature pigs. The proportion of islets larger than 100 μm in diameter was not significantly related to donor age, body weight, or sex (Fig. 3), although it tended to be higher in donor pigs with greater body weights (P = 0.083).Correlation of the proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets with age (A), body weight (B), and sex (C). Error bar represents the median and interquartile range.The use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes (P = 0.0001 for Liberase MTF C/T and P < 0.001 for CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease), a male sex of the donor (P = 0.0010), and a proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets >56% (P < 0.0001) shortened the duration required for diabetes reversal in Kaplan–Meier survival analysis (Fig. 4). We also constructed a multivariable Cox regression model. The following covariates were included: the proportion of large (>100 μm) islets in the donor pancreas as a categorical variable at the cutoff of 56%, sex and age of donor, cold ischemia time, type of collagenase blend, and beta‐cell viability index. This analysis showed that the use of enzymes other than Liberase PI, male sex of the donor, and a proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets >56% were each independent predictors of earlier diabetes reversal in recipient mice (Table 3).Kaplan–Meier survival curves for diabetes reversal of recipient NOD/SCID mouse according to enzyme (A), sex (B), and proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets (C). PI, Liberase PI; MTF, Liberase MTF C/T; MA/BP, CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease.To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of porcine islet isolation using both DPF miniature pigs and the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes. We showed that the use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes produced islet yields equivalent to conventional enzymes and had better post‐transplant outcomes than Liberase PI. Furthermore, greater proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets in the biopsied donor pancreas and male sex of the donor miniature pig were related to better graft function in vivo.Because it has been reported that the collagenase activity of Liberase HI might deteriorate during storage time due to the activity of thermolysin [16] and optimal concentrations of each component enzyme have been determined in human islet isolation [17], the current collagenase blends for clinical islet isolation are produced as separate collagenase and neutral protease components. There have been some reports on human islet isolation that some of the enzymes have high proportion of intact C1 component [8, 9] that might enhance the effective digestion of pancreatic tissue with more intact islet. In this study, the use of Liberase MTF C/T and CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease enzymes shortened digestion time, improved survival rate during overnight culture (Table 2), and showed earlier diabetes reversal in the recipient NOD/SCID mice (Table 3 and Fig. 4), as compared with the case with Liberase PI. At least in part, this could be explained by less islet damage due to the shortened digestion time that resulted from the optimal digestion. Although the cold ischemia time of the Liberase MTF C/T group, which was shorter than that of Liberase PI group, would also be a contributor of better islet quality in Liberase MTF C/T group, cold ischemia time was not significantly associated with earlier diabetes reversal in multivariable analysis (Table 3). Moreover, the excellent islet graft function achieved by CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease was not explained by the difference in cold ischemia time because cold ischemia time of this group was not different from that of other experimental groups. This could be explained in part by the fact that all the donor miniature pigs were male in the CIzyme collagenase MA/BP protease group (Table 2), but it is also notable that the activity of collagenase was measured by CDA [8] and a less aggressive form of neutral protease was used in this group. As for the Liberase MTF C/T group, graft endotoxin content in the cases with this GMP‐grade enzyme would have been much less than those with Liberase PI, so that the harmful effect of endotoxin could be minimized [18].Another major goal of this study was to revise the donor selection strategy for islet isolation from the DPF miniature pigs. We previously reported that uncastrated male miniature pigs were better donors than female miniature pigs, including retired breeder miniature pigs, in terms of islet isolation yield [10]. Because islet graft function was not assessed in the previous study, however, it has been still inconclusive whether male donors were superior to female donors. In this study, we showed that earlier diabetes reversal was achieved with the islet from the male donor miniature pigs than that from the female donor miniature pigs, in which majority were breeder (6 of 10). This finding is consistent with the finding published by another group that castration of male miniature pigs resulted in significant insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, hyperglucagonemia, and decreased beta cell function [19]. The same group reported that castrated male miniature pigs came to resemble the intact female miniature pigs with respect to both testosterone and estradiol concentrations [20].In addition, the results of this study indicate that histomorphometrical parameters from the donor pancreas should be considered for the revised donor selection strategy for islet isolation from DPF pigs. Even though we used a homogeneous, closed herd of DPF pigs, we observed that the islet yield was highly variable and the proportion of islets larger than 200 μm in the donor pancreas was the most reliable independent predictor of islet isolation yield. Furthermore, we reproduced the finding of the previous study using slaughterhouse pigs [11] that the proportion of large (>100 μm in diameter) islets in the donor pancreas was an important predictor of post‐transplant outcomes in the setting of islet isolation from DPF pigs. Therefore, we examined which donor factor(s) would reflect the presence of a greater amount of large islets in the pancreas. The proportion of islets larger than 200 μm in donor pancreatic tissue was not associated with sex and age of pigs. The only donor factor associated with the proportion of large islets in the donor pancreas was body weight. This result is consistent with the report that beta cell mass increased proportionally to the increase in body weight in the obese Göttingen miniature pig model [21] and that obesity resulted in the formation of larger islets in pigs [21] and humans [22]. In fact, beta cell mass is known to be dynamic and increases and decreases in both function and morphology to maintain the glycemic level within a very narrow physiological range [23]. In rodents, beta cell mass increases with body weight through increases in both cell number and size in the initial months of life and only by increased beta cell size in later life stages [24]. This principle would be applicable in this study because SNU miniature pigs older than 24 months were chosen as donors in most experiments (Figs 1B and 3A) based on the result from our previous study in which donor age >24 months and male sex were associated with higher porcine islet yield [10]. Practically, we suggest that body weight should have a high priority in the donor selection strategy if the donor pig is not very young, given that information from the histomorphometrical analysis of biopsied pancreas is not available before the pancreatectomy and sometimes the heterogeneity of islet allocation and size distribution over the whole porcine pancreas would make the information from the three frozen section less reliable in individual case.The major limitation of this study was that the results of in vitro islet function tests that support the earlier diabetes reversal with the novel enzymes were not available. In our hand, unlikely in the islet from other species, the glucose‐stimulated insulin secretion index of isolated porcine islet often showed paradoxical response as suggested by several groups [25-27] despite excellent islet graft function in vivo. Several alternative in vitro islet function tests for human islets failed to predict the post‐transplantation outcome of porcine islets in immune‐deficient mice in our previous study [11]. Unexpectedly, the only in vitro test that predicted in vivo outcome in the previous study [11], the beta‐cell viability index, failed to predict in vivo islet graft function in this study. We speculate that the main contributor of this discrepancy would be the technical errors such as the inconsistency of gating strategy, because the design of this study includes a historical control (the Liberase PI group). Although there have been numerous efforts to develop a reliable in vitro test to predict in vivo islet graft function [13, 28-32], porcine species‐specific evidence of such test to predict in vivo outcome needs to be established with further studies with porcine islets. Until such data are available, the histomorphometric analysis of donor pancreatic tissue might be a useful add‐on to the current algorithm of islet product release criteria, because it helps the prediction of in vivo islet graft function.In conclusion, use of the newer bovine nervous tissue–free enzymes including a GMP‐grade enzyme resulted in better islet quality than that of islet isolated using Liberase PI. To obtain high‐quality islet from DPF pigs, the donor should be male pig and histomorphometrical parameters from donor pancreas should be considered. The consideration of factors associated with favorable islet isolation yield and post‐transplant outcome in this study could contribute to the algorithm of clinical porcine islet isolation and product release criteria.This work was supported by a grant from the Korea Health 21 R & D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (Project A040004). The authors declare that they have no competing interests.SMJ performed the experiments, analyzed the data, participated in the conception of the study, and drafted the manuscript. KSK, CHG, and SKP performed the experiments and participated in the analysis of the data. JSS, JSK, SCY, ESH, and CTL participated in the critical revision of the manuscript. SJK and CGP conceived and designed the study and participated in the critical revision of the manuscript.Volume18, Issue6November/December 2011Pages 369-379© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/SWorking off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsEndocrine‐disrupting chemicals released into natural watercourses may cause biased sex ratios by sex reversal in fish populations. The present study investigated the androgenic sex reversal of zebrafish (Danio rerio) exposed to the androgenic compound 17β‐trenbolone (TB) and whether sex‐changed females would revert to the female phenotype after cessation of TB exposure. 17β‐Trenbolone is a metabolite of trenbolone acetate, an anabolic steroid used as a growth promoter in beef cattle. 17β‐Trenbolone in runoff from cattle feedlots may reach concentrations that affect fish sexual development. Zebrafish were exposed to a concentration of 20 ng/L TB in a flow‐through system for five months from egg until sexual maturity. This resulted in an all‐male population. It was further found that all these phenotypic males displayed normal male courtship behavior and were able to reproduce successfully, implying that the sex reversal was complete and functional. None of the phenotypic males developed into females after six months in clean water, demonstrating that androgenic sex reversal of zebrafish is irreversible. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2010; 29:1828–1833. © 2010 SETACThere is unambiguous evidence that endocrine‐disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can impair reproduction and have long‐term effects on fish populations in the wild 1, 2. Endocrine‐disrupting chemicals interact with the reproductive hormones, causing a number of reproductive disturbances. First, sex determination in teleost fish is very labile and can be disturbed or even functionally reversed by external application of hormones at critical developmental stages 3. Second, the aquatic environment represents a sink for most anthropogenic contaminants, and fish populations are directly exposed to a wide variety of EDCs originating from industrial, agricultural, or municipal effluents. In later years, increasing attention has been devoted to chemicals with androgenic effects 4-7. Early evidence of masculinization of fish in the wild by these xenoandrogens was the masculinization of female mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis holbrooki) downstream of pulp mills in the United States 8. Several studies have focused on the environmental impact of anabolic growth promoters from animal feedlot effluents, including the highly potent synthetic androgen trenbolone acetate 4, 9. 17β‐Trenbolone (TB), which is used in the present study, is a metabolite of trenbolone acetate and is excreted by cattle treated with trenbolone acetate implants 10. 17β‐Trenbolone is moderately stable both in animal waste and in the environment, with a half‐life in the order of 260 d in liquid manure 11. It binds with high affinity to fish androgen receptors 12 and has been demonstrated to masculinize female fish, alter gonad morphology, and reduce fecundity at nanogram concentrations 5, 12. Concentrations of 10 and 20 ng/L TB have been measured in feedlot runoff 10. Sexual development in teleosts is protracted and very plastic 3, 13, and the teleost gonad shows a general developmental bipotentiality 3. Fully functional female‐to‐male sex reversal can be induced by exposing juvenile fish to androgens 13.The objective of the present experiment was to determine whether zebrafish from an all‐male population, resulting from a lifetime exposure to 20 ng/L TB, develop into fully functional males with the ability to perform male courtship behavior and successfully reproduce. This would provide the first evidence that androgenically induced sex change in zebrafish is complete and functional and not just morphological. A further goal was to test the reversibility of the masculinization.A stock of 400 zebrafish (Danio rerio) was obtained from Credo Fish (Aalborg, Denmark). Approximately 15 males and 30 females were randomly selected from the stock to produce progeny for each of three replicas. At 1 d posthatch (dph), 500 eggs were placed in each of six (46 × 28 × 28 cm; L × W × H) seamless glass exposure tanks (Struers KEBO Laboratory, Copenhagen, Denmark). The hatched fish were transferred to larger tanks (65 × 31 × 31) at 30 dph, and the fish load in each tank was scaled down to 60 individuals at 60 dph. Larvae were fed daily with Tetra‐Min Baby (Tetra Werke) and boiled egg yolk. From 10 dph, the diet was supplied with live Artemia. Adult zebrafish were fed daily with Tetra‐Min and live Artemia ad libitum. The stock tank and the exposure tanks were supplied with water from a header tank, containing aerated, demineralized water at 28°C, mixed with tap water (16:1) and adjusted with NaCl to give a conductivity of 275 ± 9.0 µS. Water was carried from the header tank to the exposure tanks at a flow rate of 57.6 L per day via peristaltic pumps (Ole Dich Instrument Makers). An outlet with a filter maintained the volume in the exposure tanks at 22 L, resulting in a continuous flow‐through system. The oxygen content was 82.3 ± 6.1%, and the pH during exposure was 7.5 ± 0.2. The load of ammonium, nitrate, and nitrite was measured with tetratest (Tetra Werke) and did not exceed recommended values. Water quality was consistently fine at all times during the experiment, and there were no differences in water quality between tanks. The photoperiod was 14:10‐h (light:dark), and a sunrise was simulated before the light was turned on.The zebrafish were exposed to 20 ng/L 17β‐trenbolone from 1 dph until 150 dph, when they had reached sexual maturity 14. The control group, receiving only the carrier solvent, acetone, and the TB‐exposed group both consisted of three replicas. The nominal concentration of acetone in the exposure tanks was 16.3 µl/L, which is lower than the maximum recommendable value. A stock solution of 1,214 ng/L 17β‐trenbolone (4,9,11‐estratrien‐17β‐OL‐3‐ONE ACETATA; Steraloids) was dissolved in acetone and stored in the dark at 4°C. New stock solutions were made every fifth day. A programmable syringe pump (Multi‐Phaser™; Braintree Scientific) dosed the solutions continually from six 50‐ml syringes to the inlet water from the peristaltic pumps, using Hamilton needles. The tanks were cleaned for feces daily.The actual concentration of TB in water samples was analyzed by 1200 Series high‐performance liquid chromatography and a 6410 triple quad mass spectrometer (MS), both from Agilent Technologies.Behavioral trials were carried out with randomly selected fish from the TB exposure tanks and male fish from the control tanks, respectively. The test tanks (28 × 13 × 21 cm) contained 6 cm water from the stock tank at 26°C. The low water level limited vertical movement of the fish, which could disturb the behavioral measurements. The test fish and a standard female zebrafish were then placed in the test tank. Standard females were mature females from the stock tank. To enhance the probability that these standard females were ready to spawn at the behavioral trial, they were isolated from males for 5 d prior to the behavioral test. To stimulate egg development, water with pheromones from the stock tank was added daily to the tanks with the isolated females.During zebrafish courtship behavior, the male tries to attract the female and lead her to the spawning ground. He then entices her to spawn with rapid tail oscillations against her side 15. To ensure a suitable spawning area, a plastic tray (10 × 10 cm) with transparent marbles (0.5 cm diameter) was placed in one corner of the test tank. The two fish were acclimated in the test tank overnight, separated by a partition wall. On the next morning, the test tank was placed on a sheet of glass 50 cm above diffusely lit white paper (79 lux). The entire setup was enclosed in a metal frame covered with a blackout curtain to exclude visual disturbances. When viewed from above, this arrangement resulted in clear silhouettes of the two fish, in which the male was distinguishable from the larger female. After removal of the partition wall, the scenario was recorded for 45 min following a simulated 4‐min sunrise (1–134 lux).A CV‐M10 progressive scan (noninterlaced) CCD camera (JAI, Copenhagen, Denmark) was mounted approximately 50 cm above the test tank. The analogue video signal from the camera was digitized by a DT3154 frame grabber (Data Translation) into a 768‐ × 576‐pixel digital image, giving a 0.36‐mm spatial resolution of the visual field. The frame grabber was interfaced with a 2‐GHz Pentium 4 personal computer.The behavioral measurements were controlled by the MOTIO vision system (Department of Biological Sciences, University of Aarhus). Prior to recording, the interior of the test tank was framed by a software window (region of interest), and appropriate ranges of gray level, area, perimeter, and form corresponding to the fish silhouettes were likewise set in the software. The centroids of the two pixel assemblages fulfilling both gray‐level and shape criteria were calculated and recorded as the x,y positions of the two fish. The resultant time series of x,y coordinates was stored in a primary data file together with information on the experiment and calibration factors for the conversion of pixel values into millimeters. During the 45‐min recording, an image was captured and processed approximately every one‐twelfth of a second.The raw data files containing the time series of fish positions were transformed into series of connected vectors and analyzed by the MOTIO software. The male courtship behavior was evaluated on the basis of the following eight parameters: total swimming distance (m), average velocity (mm/s), turning rate (°/s), swimming distance in spawning area (m), visits to spawning area, number of meetings with the standard female, total duration of meetings (min), and average distance between test fish and standard female (mm). The program has previously been used to investigate zebrafish behavior successfully 16.The male fish were placed individually in visually isolated tanks (20 × 15 × 20 cm) with 10 cm water and two standard females. The bottom was covered with colored glass marbles to minimize oophagy. The fish were fed live Artemia ad libitum. The bottom of the tanks was cleaned for feces and eggs were collected daily. The fish were held in the tanks for 7 d, and the standard females were replaced if no eggs had been spawned after 3 d. The eggs were collected 4 h after the light was turned on in the morning, after which the number of fertilized eggs was recorded. The eggs were then incubated in a Petri dish for 7 d at 26°C, and the numbers of dead eggs and hatched larvae were recorded daily, with the fertilization rate and hatching rate calculated subsequently.After the fertility tests, secondary sexual characteristics (urogenital papilla, body color, body shape, and anal fin) of each test fish were determined as masculine, indeterminable, or feminine. This was accomplished by visual observation of each individual in a test tube filled with water. A typical male zebrafish has no papilla, a slim body shape, a reddish coloration, and a large anal fin with distinct markings. A typical female zebrafish has a large, visible urogenital papilla, a round body shape, a bluish coloration, and an indistinct anal fin coloration 17, 18.The test fish were anesthetized in ethyl P‐aminobenzoate (benzocaine) solution and placed on the right side on a microscope slide under the dissection microscope. Ten microliters of 175 mM KCl solution was placed at the vent, and the fish was gently stroked three times from the abdomen to the vent with the blunt side of a pair of tweezers. The semen and the 10 µl KCl solution were then collected in a Finn‐pipette adjusted to 10 µl and transferred to an Eppendorf tube with 90 µl 175 mM KCl. The semen solution was mixed with a pipette to ensure that the semen was evenly distributed. Ten microliters of the semen solution was transferred to a counting chamber (Improved Neubauer Hemacytoeter) and left for 10 min to ensure that the spermatozoa were immobile when counting. The sperm cells were then counted under a phase‐contrast microscope according to the World Health Organization 1992 standard, and the concentration of spermatozoa in the original semen sample was determined. The zebrafish were finally killed in ethyl P‐aminobenzoate solution and blotted dry, and the weight and length were determined. Finally, the sex was confirmed by examination of the gonads under a dissection microscope.After terminating the exposure, 32 fish from the control group and 26 fish from the TB‐exposure group received clean water in flow‐through tanks for six months. Thereafter, the secondary sexual characteristics were determined, and the fish were sexed by examination of the gonads under a dissection microscope.The three replicas in each of the two groups were analyzed for normality and homogeneity of variances. When complying, differences in mean value were analyzed with one‐way analysis of variance, and the three replicates were subsequently pooled. Differences in behavior, body weight, and standard length were detected using the independent‐samples t test. When data did not comply with normality, but when simple log‐transformation resulted in normality, the t test was carried out. Homogeneity of variances was tested with Levene's test and was found in all cases. Differences in sex ratio, secondary sexual characteristics, fertilization rate, hatching rate, sperm counts, and spawning were tested with the χ2 test, performed in MS Excel 2000 (Microsoft). Power analysis was determined in JMP 7.0 (SAS Institute). All other statistical tests were performed in SPSS 13.0 for Windows (SPSS). Data are presented as mean value ± standard error. The level of significance was 0.05.The actual concentration of the nominal 20 ng/L TB was determined to be 26.1 ± 16.3 ng/L TB. In the following, all biological results refer to the nominal TB concentrations. The fish in all exposure tanks were healthy, and no differences in mortality, feeding activity, or locomotor behavior between the TB‐exposed group and the control group were observed. Courtship behavior was noticed in the control tanks from day 83 ± 4 after hatching, in accordance with other studies 16, 19. Courtship behavior was never observed in the TB‐exposure tanks.The TB treatment resulted in a nearly all‐male population, with no females and only one indeterminable individual from among 59. The proportion of males was thus 98% compared with 74% in the control group (χ2 test, p < 0.001; Fig. 1).The upper two bars show the sex ratio of zebrafish (Danio rerio) in a control group (Con; n = 171) compared with a group exposed to 20 ng/L 17β‐trenbelone (TB) from egg stage to sexual maturity (n = 59). The lower two bars represent a control group (n = 32) compared with a group exposed to 20 ng/L TB from egg stage to sexual maturity followed by a six‐month period in clean water (CW; n = 26). Black represents the percentage of males, white the percentage of fish classified as indifferent and the hatched percentage of females. Asterisks indicate the statistically significant effects of the TB treatment compared with the control groups.No significant differences were detected between the courtship behavior of the control males and the TB‐exposed zebrafish: total swimming distance (t test, p = 0.095; power = 0.386), average velocity (t test, p = 0.440; power = 0.120), turning rate (t test, p = 0.099; power = 0.379), path in spawning area (t test, p = 0.079; power = 0.303), visits to spawning area (t test, p = 0.100; power = 0.348), number of meetings with the standard female (t test, p = 0.453; power = 0.116), total duration of meetings (t test, p = 0.395; power = 0.135), and average distance between test fish and standard female (t test, p = 0.913; power = 0.051; Fig. 2).Eight measured behavioral components in the courtship behavior of male zebrafish (Danio rerio) during 45‐min trials with a standard female. No significant differences were found between the control group (n = 39) and the group exposed to 20 ng/L 17β‐trenbolone (TB) from egg stage to sexual maturity (n = 54). Entries are presented as mean values ± standard error.The males from both the control group and the TB‐exposed group were able to induce spawning in the females and to fertilize the eggs. Ninety‐four percent of the control males and 91% of the TB treated fish induced spawning during the 7 d of fertility trials, with no significant difference between the two groups (χ2 test, p = 0.738). The average fertility rate was 63.6% for control males and 52.1% for TB‐exposed fish (t test, p = 0.282). The hatching rates were 53.2% for the control group and 48.9% for the TB‐exposed group (t test, p = 0.053). The average spermatozoan concentration was 2.78 × 106/ml in the control males and 1.27 × 106/ml in the TB‐treated zebrafish. No significant difference was found (t test, p = 0.159), but it should be noted that the variation was considerable in both groups and that stripping of zebrafish males has a highly variable rate of success 20. The testes of control fish as well as TB‐treated fish appeared normal when analyzed under the dissection microscope.All TB‐exposed zebrafish were unmistakably masculinized, had male reproductive organs, and had male secondary sexual characteristics. Only very few of the TB‐exposed fish, as well as the control males, had feminine or indeterminable characteristics, and no significant differences was found between the two groups as regards coloration (χ2 test, p = 0.271), body shape (χ2 test, p = 0.190), and anal fin (χ2 test, p = 0.268). For these three characteristics, 80 to 90% were classified as masculine in both the control males and the TB‐exposed zebrafish. Regarding the fourth investigated secondary sexual characteristic, it was observed that 41% of the TB‐exposed zebrafish had a visible urogenital papilla compared with only 5% of the control males (χ2 test, p = 0.001; Fig. 3), demonstrating this nonmasculine characteristic in nearly half the population. The much larger and distinct female‐like urogenital papilla was never observed in either TB‐exposed fish or control males.Presence of urogenital papilla in male zebrafish (Danio rerio) from a control group (n = 42) compared with a group exposed to 20 ng/L 17β‐trenbelone (TB) from egg stage to sexual maturity (n = 59) and a clean water (CW) control group (n = 21) compared with a group exposed to 20 ng/L TB from egg stage to sexual maturity followed by a six‐month period in clean water (n = 26). Black represents the percentage of fish with no visible urogenital papilla, and white represents the percentage of fish with a clearly visible urogenital papilla. Asterisks indicate statistically significant effect of the TB treatment compared with the control group.The average length and weight of male fish in the control group were 34.8 mm ± 0.45 and 0.458 g ± 0.03, respectively, compared with 34.4 mm ± 0.41 and 0.414 g ± 0.02 in the TB group. There was no significant difference between the two groups with respect to either length (t test, p = 0.094) or weight (t test, p = 0.278). The average weight of the testes was 0.0043 ± 0.0004 g in the control group and 0.0038 ± 0.0004 g in the TB group, and the weights did not differ significantly between the two groups (t test, p = 0.226).The 26 zebrafish treated with 20 ng/L TB for five months followed by six months in clean water were all morphological males with testes of normal appearance. No significant changes were noted in any of the four secondary sexual characteristics: urogenital papilla (χ2 test, p = 0.676), coloration (χ2 test, p = 0.828), body shape (χ2 test, p = 0.216), and appearance of the anal fin (χ2 test, p = 0.109) compared with the TB‐exposed fish that had not been in clean water. In comparison with the clean water control group, a significant difference was noted in sex ratio (χ2 test, p < 0.001; binomial test, p < 0.016) as well as in the proportion of the male fish with visible urogenital papilla (χ2 test, p < 0.001). No significant difference was observed in any of the three remaining secondary sexual characteristics: coloration (χ2 test, p = 0.692), body shape (χ2 test, p = 0.950), and appearance of the anal fin (χ2 test, p = 0.275; Fig. 2).In the present study, exposure of zebrafish to 20 ng/L TB until 150 dph led to a skewed sex ratio, with no morphologically female zebrafish. It is obvious that an all‐male population will fail to reproduce, but other extreme sex ratios will also reduce effective population size considerably, and sex reversal can thus have profound effects on population growth and persistence 21. 17β‐Trenbolone has earlier been reported to cause masculinization in female zebrafish and to decrease vitellogenin production in zebrafish, fathead minnow (Pimephales promales), and Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) 5, 6. An all‐male population of zebrafish has also been reported after exposure to 50 ng/L TB until 60 dph 6 as well as after exposure to TB concentrations of 15.4 ng/L TB and above until 60 dph (J. E. Morthorst, University of Southern Denmark, personal communication). Data on effects of TB on wildlife fish populations are very limited, but defeminization of fathead minnows living downstream of cattle feedlots has been observed 4.Although altered steroid levels clearly have an effect on sexual differentiation in fish, the trigger mechanism of sexual differentiation has not yet been elucidated 22. It is, however, known that the hormonal balance between estrogens and androgens appears to be an important factor in the cause of sexual differentiation 13, 23. The sex hormone balance depends strongly on the conversion of androgens to estrogens by the enzyme cytochrome P540 aromatase (CYP19). Most vertebrates have a single CYP19 gene, but zebrafish have two tissue‐specific genes, CYP19A1 (gonadal type) and CYP19A2 (brain type) 24. Repression of the P540 aromatase in the gonads most likely is required in order to drive differentiation toward testis development 25. Cytochrome P450 aromatase‐inhibiting EDCs such as procloraz can thus skew the sex ratio toward males 7. It has been shown that phenotypically all‐male zebrafish can be produced by exposure to the aromatase inhibitors fadrozole or procloraz during development 7, 23, 26. Another mechanism behind masculinization of fish with EDCs is agonistic binding of androgens to the androgen receptor (AR). The AR is a ligand‐activated transcription factor that binds to specific DNA recognition sites, thereby regulating the transcription of androgen target genes and mediating the effect of androgens 27. The endogenous ligands are steroid androgens such as testosterone, but some exogenous androgens, including TB, can also activate the AR and mimic the effects of testosterone 28. It has been hypothesized that TB, besides the direct effects mediated by the AR, might indirectly inhibit the production of 17β‐estradiol by decreasing testosterone production, whereby the conversion of testosterone into 17β‐estradiol by aromatase is limited 29. The precise mechanism behind the masculinizing effect of TB is still unknown.The normal percentage of males in zebrafish populations varies considerably and has in earlier studies been demonstrated to range from 46 to 69%, with a surplus of males 16, 17, 23, 30. We have no explanation for the somewhat higher 74% male proportion in our control groups.The TB‐exposed zebrafish in the present study displayed well‐developed male courtship behavior that did not differ significantly from that of control males. This result was supported by the fact that 91% of the TB‐exposed zebrafish were able to induce spawning in standard females during the fecundity trials. Female zebrafish will spawn only when courted by a male, so this confirmed that the courtship behavior of the TB‐exposed zebrafish was efficient. It was noticed, however, that the behavior of the TB‐exposed fish was slightly abbreviated from that of the control males in that they were slightly inferior to the control males in all of the measured parameters, though insignificantly. It could be interesting to evaluate the behavior of TB‐exposed zebrafish under competitive conditions, insofar as this might enhance the tendency toward a less efficient courtship. It is, however, clear that the TB‐exposed zebrafish are not only morphological but also behaviorally masculinized. This is not surprising, in that the sexual behavior in fish is strongly regulated by hormones and because early androgen exposure might permanently organize the nervous system in a male‐like manner 31.The TB‐exposed males were not stimulated by female zebrafish during their development, but in spite of this they developed the basis for functional courtship behavior. Even so, the lack of practice during their development might account for the minor abbreviations in courtship behavior. This has never been investigated, but it has been found that the social behavior of zebrafish is partially determined by their social environment 32 and that there is an aspect of early learning in shoaling preferences in zebrafish 33.It was apparent that the TB‐treated fish were all functional males. They were able to induce spawning and to fertilize eggs with a normal hatching rate compared with control males. To our knowledge, this has never been demonstrated before. Even so, there was a tendency for the TB‐treated fish to be slightly inferior in all the measured parameters compared with the control males. This could be explained if the sex‐reversed males are less efficient than the original males. It could also be an overall effect of the TB treatment on the original males of the TB‐treated group as well as the sex‐reversed males. As with the behavior, it is possible that the somewhat lower reproduction capacity of the TB‐exposed fish would have been more evident if evaluated under competitive conditions.In an earlier study, TB was found to masculinize adult female fathead minnows 12. The TB treatment in the present study resulted in a population of phenotypic male zebrafish with slender bodies, a reddish coloration, and a large anal fin with distinct markings. The only exception from an overall male‐like appearance was a high occurrence of visible urogenital papilla, which was found in the TB‐exposed groups before as well as after the period in clean water. This could be a persistent feminine reminiscence in the original females, but this would be impossible to prove insofar as there is no unambiguous way of determining whether a phenotypic male is a genetic male or a masculinized female, because no technique is available for genetic sex determination in zebrafish.In the present study, no indication of reversibility of the androgenic sex change was detected. This result is in accordance with a study by Fenske and Segner 23 who found no reversibility when zebrafish masculinized with fadrozole were transferred to clean water. In contrast to the apparent irreversibility of androgenic sex reversal, studies have shown reversibility of estrogenic sex reversals in zebrafish 18, 34, 35. Hence, Larsen et al. 34 demonstrated that male zebrafish can be restored in a 17α‐ethinylestradiol‐treated all‐female population when kept in clean water. This reversible nature of zebrafish feminization could be related to the developmental pattern in zebrafish. The zebrafish is an undifferentiated gonochorist, implying that all individuals initially develop ovary‐like gonads, which then undergo apoptosis and changes into testes at about 20 to 40 dph in the male portion of the population 30, 36. It is still unknown what directs this process, but it seems that aromatase might play an important role 23, and it has been suggested that germ cell apoptosis in the ovary‐like gonad is generated by reduction of aromatase and estrogen levels in male zebrafish 26. The transition of the male zebrafish gonad from ovary‐like tissue to testis is thus characterized by loss of germ cells 36, and it has been speculated that these germ cells are required for the ovary development in zebrafish 37. If the germ cells are absent, the gonads differentiate into testes, and the fish develop as a phenotypic male with male coloration and courtship behavior 37. Sex‐reversed males can thus be restored to a male phenotype, whereas sex change of genotypic females is irreversible because of the loss of germ cells during testis development. A similar pattern has been found in medaka, in which germ cell‐deficient fish show female‐to‐male sex reversal of their phenotype 38. Kurokawa et al. 38 suggest, based on this, that gonadal somatic cells are predisposed toward male development in the absence of germ cells. However, some disagreement exists; Slanchev et al. 39 found that zebrafish without germ cells do not have gonadal tissue at all as adults.It seems highly unlikely that a longer period in clean water would eventually reverse the androgenic effect of TB. Even should this be the case, it would have no practical significance, given the relatively short life expectancy of zebrafish in the wild 40.It is difficult to detect TB in feedlot runoff and even more so to link androgenic effects of feedlot effluent with the chemical itself 9, 10. Still, concentrations of 10 and 20 ng/L TB have been measured in feedlot runoff 10, and the concentration in the present study is thus likely to be of environmental relevance.This work was supported by the Danish Natural Science Research Council. The authors are grateful to Poul Bjerregaard and Bente Holbech Jacobsen for determining the actual TB concentrations and to Katrine Bilberg for assistance with maintaining the zebrafish.Volume29, Issue8August 2010Pages 1828-1833Copyright © 2010 SETACSETAC.orgEnvironmental Toxicology and Chemistry (ETC)Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management (IEAM)AdvertisementBMC Molecular Biology
 9, Article number: 85 (2008) Cite this article5571 Accesses20 Citations0 AltmetricMetricsSRY is the pivotal gene initiating male sex determination in most mammals, but how its expression is regulated is still not understood. In this study we derived novel SRY 5' flanking genomic sequence data from bovine and caprine genomic BAC clones.We identified four intervals of high homology upstream of SRY by comparison of human, bovine, pig, goat and mouse genomic sequences. These conserved regions contain putative binding sites for a large number of known transcription factor families, including several that have been implicated previously in sex determination and early gonadal development.Our results reveal potentially important SRY regulatory elements, mutations in which might underlie cases of idiopathic human XY sex reversal.Sex in mammals normally correlates with the presence or absence of the Y chromosome. Male sex determination in almost all mammals is directly caused by the correct expression and function of a single Y-linked gene, SRY[1–4]. SRY activity in males causes the bipotential gonad, the genital ridge, to set off on the path to becoming a testis. If the fetal genital ridge does not express SRY, ovary development is initiated instead. A majority of gonadal dysgenesis cases cannot be attributed to mutations within or immediately 5' of SRY, or to any other gene known to have a role in sex determination. We hypothesise that this is because SRY's regulatory regions are uncharted, therefore providing no means to check specific areas for mutation.SRY carries out a similar function in all mammals in which it is present, but displays a high degree of variability between species. This situation is thought to result from the location of SRY on the Y chromosome, exposing it to a higher rate of mutation compared to autosomal genes, thereby leading to DNA degradation and even loss [5]. The region of SRY best conserved between species is the high mobility group (HMG) box, which confers the encoded protein its transcription factor role by allowing it to bind and bend DNA [6, 7]. Outside the HMG box, SRY is very poorly conserved between species. This lack of conservation has made it difficult to define functional motifs required for the role of SRY protein in directing male sex determination.The regulation of SRY is under tight control to ensure its expression at the right time, place and level necessary to initiate male sex determination. In mice, delayed onset of Sry expression, or reduced levels of Sry expression, is known to cause full or partial XY sex reversal [8–10]. Therefore, an understanding of how SRY expression is regulated is an important part of the overall picture of its functions in male sex determination and of how disturbances in function can lead to disorders of sex development.As with the SRY coding region, sequences beyond the transcription unit of SRY are very poorly conserved between species, a situation that has contributed to an almost total lack of understanding of how the expression of this gene is regulated. Comparative genomics is normally a powerful tool for identifying biologically important gene regulatory regions, based on the conservation of functional regulatory modules being under selective pressure during evolution [11–13], but this method has shown only limited success in studies of SRY to date. Although mice are most useful for a range of developmental and functional genetic studies, their utility in comparative genomics is limited by their unusually high rate of sequence drift, thought to be linked to their short generation time [14].Progress in identifying potential gene regulatory motifs through comparative genomics relies on the availability of genome sequences from a range of non-murine mammals. A study analysing non-coding sequences in 39 bovine, human and mouse gene orthologues revealed 73 putative regulatory intervals conserved between bovine and human genes, only 13 of which were also conserved in mice [15]. Further comparative genomic analysis of these regions showed that the homology to human is highest in bovine, and weakest in the mouse. Other studies also point to an excellent conservation of bovine and human sequences in the promoter region of genes such as Oct4, but relatively poor conservation of the corresponding mouse sequences [16].In the present study we generated novel bovine and caprine SRY 5' sequence data in order to conduct comparative genomic analysis of 5' sequences from human, bull, pig, goat and mouse Sry. In this way we identified four novel sequence intervals that may be important for the correct regulation of SRY expression and therefore for correct function of SRY in mammalian sex determination. The identification of these candidate regulatory regions provides a focus for efforts to discover new mutations associated with human idiopathic XY sex reversal.In order to provide new tools for comparative genomic analysis of potential SRY 5' regulatory sequences, we first generated novel flanking sequence from the bovine and caprine SRY genes. The BAC clone RP42-95D10 containing bovine SRY [17] was found by Southern blotting and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to contain a 15 kb Eco R1 fragment harbouring SRY (data not shown). This fragment was subcloned, and sequenced to five times coverage [GenBank EU581861].Alignment of the bovine sequence with published human [EMBL: NT_011896.9 nucleotides 5177–21272] and mouse [EMBL: NT_078925.6 nucleotides 1917040–1934040] SRY 5' sequence allowed the preliminary identification of several potentially conserved sequence blocks. We generated corresponding fragments of the goat SRY 5' region by PCR using as template a goat BAC clone containing SRY and known to cause female to male sex reversal in mice [18]. These fragments were sequenced, aligned, and appended to existing goat SRY sequence where possible, and used for further analysis [Genbank EU581862, EU581863, and EU581864].We next used the novel 15 kb of bovine SRY 5' sequence as a reference point for comparative genomic studies. VISTA alignment of the bovine sequence with human, porcine (4.6 kb) [19], caprine (individual regions described above), and mouse (17 kb), revealed four sequence blocks of significant homology (Figure 1). These blocks (A, B, C and D) from human, caprine and porcine SRY displayed at least 50% nucleotide identity to bovine sequence by VISTA analysis using 100 bp windows. The four conserved blocks were separated by non-conserved sequence, the length of which varied between species (Figure 2). In the goat no intervening sequences were detected between region C and D. The main features of each conserved block are as follows:Homology of human, caprine, porcine and mouse SRY 5' sequences to bovine SRY. Pink shading indicates 70% or higher homologies calculated over 100 bp. Peaks of homology are labelled Region A to D above the graph. Repetitive elements (LINEs and SINEs) are indicated in green, and the SRY coding region in blue. Grey line below each graph shows the extent of sequence used.Spacing of and co-ordinates of conserved SRY 5' regions in different species. Sequence information for porcine region A was not available for this study. Numbering represents number of nucleotides 5' to the transcription start site in each species, ? denotes unknown positions.Region A (480 bp) lies about 8.3 kb upstream of the start of transcription in bovine SRY (5.6 kb in human; Figure 2). It showed more than 70% conservation in 100 bp windows between bovine, human and caprine sequence over a large proportion of its length using VISTA (Figure 1, pink shading). ClustalW showed overall homology between the three species as 63 – 87% (Figure 3).DNA sequence homologies calculated across the whole of regions A, B, C and D. Species are human (hum), bovine (bov), porcine (por), caprine (cap), and murine (mur). na, porcine sequence not available.Region B (1.5 kb) begins 6.7 kb 5' of the bovine SRY start of transcription (5 kb in human; Figure 2). Bovine/human homology, in 100 bp windows of this region, was above 70%, limited to two short sequence intervals (Figure 1). This high homology between bovine and caprine, and moderate homology between bovine and human sequences, was reflected in overall ClustalW homology analysis of these regions (Figure 3). As in region A, homology of mouse sequence was minimal in this region. The available 4.6 kb of porcine genomic sequence stopped partway through this region, but aligned well with bovine sequence (Figure 1).Region C (1 kb) was found 3.9 kb upstream on the bovine sequence (3.6 kb in human; Figure 2). This was the least conserved area between bovine and human, not reaching 70% in any 100 bp window using the VISTA browser (Figure 1), and only 19% overall by ClustalW (Figure 3). Caprine sequence showed high homology to bovine in this region, porcine intermediate, and mouse negligible (Figures 1, 3).Region D was found immediately upstream of bovine, human and caprine SRY, and so represents the proximal promoter region in these species (1.9, 1.5 and 1.9 kb respectively). This region showed strong to moderate conservation across all species except mouse (Figure 1, 3). Conservation between bovine and human sequences was stronger in this region than other regions (Figure 3).No additional regions of homology were detected distal to region A within the 15 kb of bovine sequence used as anchor, when compared with 17 kb of human and 16 kb of mouse sequence.We next searched for potential transcription factor binding sites in conserved regions A-D in order to evaluate the possible significance of these regions for SRY regulation. In silico DiAlignTF analysis revealed 210 conserved, canonical transcription factor binding sites across the four regions, representing 38 transcription factor families (Table 1 and 2, Figure 4 and additional file 1). None of the transcription factor binding sites were shown as conserved in the mouse using DiAlignTF, although some nucleotide conservation was detectable when viewed by eye (Additional file 1). To allow us to add levels of significance to the putative sites they were grouped according to their occurrence patterns in the sequences (Table 1): most frequent (total number of times represented in the four regions), most common (number of regions containing each type of site) and level of conservation (number of species containing the site) among the four species examined other than mice. In addition, the matrix similarity score for each site (that is, the similarity of each putative site to the canonical binding site for the relevant transcription factor) is shown in Table 3, as further indication of the likely relevance of each putative binding site.Conserved transcription factor binding sites in each region of homology. Black text indicates conservation between 3 species of which one is human, grey text indicates 3-species conservation without human, and red text indicates conservation between 4 species (human, bovine, porcine and caprine). An example of the highly conserved area of region D is shown as a sequence alignment with conserved transcription factor binding sites boxed or shaded.The most frequently occurring transcription factor binding sites were those of BRNF and OCT1, which were represented in regions C and D a total of six times. PARF and FKHD binding sites were the next most frequent, represented four times between regions C and D. The HOXF family member binding sites were the most common, found in all of the regions and, in the case of region C, the site was conserved across four species. Eight transcription factor binding sites (HOXF, FKHD, SRFF, LHXF, CDXF repeated twice in the same region, MYT1, PLZF, and NFκB) were conserved across four species, and therefore displayed the highest level of conservation. With the exception of HOXF and LHXF (found in region C), all of these transcription factor binding sites at this four-way conservation level were found to localise to region D (Table 1 and Figure 4).Region A showed nine areas of conserved transcription factor binding sites, the most common being GATA, occurring twice. All of the sites were conserved between bovine, goat and human. Transcription factor family members unique to Region A were EVI1, TBPF, HOXC, GFI1, PITI, and OCTP (Table 1, Figure 4).Region B contained the fewest transcription factor binding sites of all the regions. Sites unique to this region were RORA, HAML and RBPF (Table 1, Figure 4).Region C contained 17 transcription factor binding site family members, with three repeated twice (BRNF, OCT1 and ETSF). Although there appeared to be many conserved transcription factor binding sites, not all were present in the human sequence. Transcription factor binding sites that were conserved in humans are HOXF, ETSF, LHXF and GZF1, all unique to this region with the exception of HOXF (Table 1 and Figure 4).Region D contained by far the largest number of transcription factor binding sites, with almost 50% of the total found. The majority showed conservation in the human sequence, and six sites were found to be very highly conserved across four species. CDXF sites are unique to region D and appeared twice close to each other conserved across four species. MYT1, PLZF, and NFκB were also unique to region D and showed conservation in four species. Other sites unique to region D and present in human were NKXH, MOKF, HOMF, RBIT and CLOX (Table 1 and Figure 4).Many of the transcription factor binding sites identified in the sequences were found in clusters of two or more, adjacent to or overlapping one another. Region A transcription factor binding sites were localised to three clusters, with the largest harbouring five transcription factor binding sites. Region B had two clusters, Region C had five, two of which contained four sites each, and Region D contained nine clusters, although on average each cluster contained only two transcription factor binding sites (Figure 4).The identification of gene regulatory regions through comparative genomics is a powerful entrée to directed studies of gene regulation. Using this method we have identified, for the first time, four regions upstream of SRY that show high conservation between human, bovine, pig and goat. Furthermore, these regions of homology share transcription factor binding sites that appear to be subject to strong evolutionary pressure for conservation and may therefore be important for correct regulation of SRY.Mouse Sry 5' sequences were found to be markedly dissimilar to other species across all regions of homology identified. This is perhaps not surprising given that mouse Sry coding sequences show particularly low homology to other species at the nucleotide and amino acid levels [7, 20]. Moreover, mouse Sry is expressed for a short, specific time, with detectable levels of Sry transcripts first appearing at 10.5 dpc and waning by 13.25 dpc [21, 22, 2, 23]. In other mammals, including humans, sheep, and pig, the gene remains actively transcribed into adulthood, albeit at a lower expression level than in fetal stages [24–27]. Therefore, mouse Sry evidently is regulated differently compared to other species and is therefore unlikely to have well conserved 5' regulatory regions.Previous data bearing on the likely position of SRY regulatory elements has come from limited homology searches, transgenesis studies, and mutation analyses. Due to the unavailability of Y chromosome sequences from mammals other than mouse and human to date, minimal sequence has been available for homology studies. One study looked for conserved sequences upstream of SRY across ten species of mammal, including human, chimpanzee, gorilla, sheep, pig, bull, gazelle, mouse, rat, and guinea pig [28]. However, only 427 to 610 bp of 5' sequence was analysed, and no meaningful conservation was identified.Boyer et al. (2006) used 3.3 kb and 5 kb of human SRY upstream sequence linked to human SRY coding sequence to produce transgenic mice, but only the larger fragment resulted in genital ridge expression of SRY. The same study showed that the pig 1.6 kb SRY promoter was sufficient for genital ridge expression [14]. Therefore we can postulate that the region necessary for genital ridge-specific regulation of SRY lies 5 kb upstream of the start of transcription in humans (corresponding to regions B, C and D from this study), and that this same site should be conserved in the pig 1.6 kb promoter (Region D). However, transgenic mouse models are subject to positional effects of the location of transgene insertion, which can cloud efforts to pinpoint gene regulatory sequences.Two documented cases of mutations 5' of the coding region of SRY leading to pure gonadal dysgenesis have been reported in human. The first, a point mutation 75 bp 5' to the gene, was associated with male to female sex reversal. A nucleotide change from G to A, located in a motif conserved in primates, was found to be responsible [29], but this motif is not conserved in other species [30]. This mutation maps to region D of the present study. The second, a 25 kb deletion 1.7 kb upstream of human SRY was identified in a sex reversed patient [31]. The deletion would remove regions A-C and part of D, identified in the present study, supporting the hypothesis that regions A-D harbour important functional SRY regulatory elements, although the possibility that the deletion affects regulatory elements lying further 5' cannot be excluded as a cause of human sex reversal.What transcription factor(s) may regulate expression of SRY? SRY is a master genetic switch that triggers testis development by initiating a cascade of gene expression. Its up-regulation marks the first male-specific gene expression event in the developing gonad. Therefore, any gene hypothesised to regulate SRY must be expressed equally in both sexes, before sex differentiation begins. Sf1, Sp1 and Wt1 are all expressed in genital ridges of both sexes and have been shown to influence expression of Sry in cell culture experiments [32–34]. Moreover, Sf1- and Wt1-knockout mice show gonadal sex development phenotypes [35, 36]. Other genes known to have a role in gonadal formation and development, based on experiments in genital ridges and the absence of gonads in knockout mice are Lim1 [37], Lhx9 [38], and Gata4 [39].The present study identified binding sites for a number of transcription factors 5' of SRY. The transcription factor families whose binding sites displayed the highest levels of conservation were LHXF, CDXF, HOXF, PLZF and NFκB. These families all have members that are plausible candidates for a role in SRY regulation. The highly conserved LHXF binding site found in region C could potentially bind either LIM1 or LHX9 transcription factors. Lhx9 is expressed in the genital ridges of male and female mice between 9.5 and 11.5 dpc. Gonads fail to form in mice null for each of these genes [37, 38]. However, complete gonadal agenesis would implicate these genes in functions other than, or possibly additional to, regulation of Sry. PLZF and Nanog may bind to the HOXF and PLZF sites in the SRY 5' region, respectively. However, both are early germ cell transcription factors, and are therefore not present in the nuclei of supporting cell precursors in which SRY is expressed. NFκB is implicated in various stages of gonad development including spermatogenesis [40]. It is known to interact with AMH, and is likely have a role during the later stages of testis function, but expression in early gonadal development has not been described.Perhaps most intriguingly, the two conserved CDXF binding sites in region D point to a role for CDX1 in SRY regulation (Figure 4). Cdx1 has been shown to be a direct target of retinoic acid [41], present in the gonads and mesonephroi of both sexes from an early stage [42, 43]. Cdx1 is expressed in the mesonephros in the developing mouse embryo and remains detectable till 12 dpc. Cdx1 knockout mice are viable and show homeotic vertebral transformations [44]. In view of the present data, it will be useful to examine the gonadal phenotype of these knockout mice.In summary, we identified a large number of potential transcription factor binding sites localised to short regions of particularly high conservation in the SRY gene in human, bovine, porcine and caprine 5' flanking sequences. However, areas of high homology also exist that appear to lack binding sites for known transcription factors. These areas may also be important for the proper regulation of the gene by harbouring binding sites for unidentified proteins or transcription factors whose binding sites have not been characterized. The identification in the present study of regions of conservation upstream of SRY may facilitate the discovery of new mutations associated with human idiopathic XY sex reversal.The BAC clone RP42-95D10 from the CHORI BAC/PAC Resource Centre was previously identified as containing the bovine SRY coding region[17]. A 15 kb Sry fragment isolated from the BAC was cloned into pBluescript II KS+ using Eco RI, and shotgun sequenced by the Australian Genome Research Facility (AGRF) Brisbane, to five times coverage. The BAC clone (library number 568E7) containing goat SRY [18], was obtained from Dr. Eric Pailhoux. Primers designed from bovine sequences (MotAf, 5'-TCCTTCCTTTTCTCCTTTGTTG-3'; MotAr, 5'-TGGCCAAAAA CTACTTGATGA-3'; MotBf, 5'-GGAACAGGAGAGATCATGAAACA-3'; MotBr, 5'-CTTCACCATTCCCACTCACC-3'; MotCf, 5'-AACTTACATGCACTTCATTCCA-3'; and MotCr, 5'-GAGGACTTCA AATATTAATGTCATCAT-3') were used to amplify and sequence regions from the goat BAC. Assembly of goat sequences was performed using Sequencher version 4.6 (Gene Codes Corporation).mVISTA http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/index.shtml and SLAGAN (Shuffle-LAGAN) [45] were used for global alignment of the sequences after masking of repetitive elements. Conserved sequence blocks were analysed for conserved transcription factor binding sites using DiAlignTF software from Genomatix [46]. This analysis was carried out on the full-length conserved sequence blocks, as well as on core areas of high conservation found with ClustalW http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/ within each block. Each block was first checked for sites conserved across four species, then three species. Only transcription factor binding sites that showed homology across more than two species were included in this report. Matrix similarity scores for the conserved binding sites were calculated by the MatInspector software from Genomatix [46].bacterial artificial chromosomebase pairdeoxyribonucleic aciddays post coitumhigh mobility groupkilobase pairpolymerase chain reactionSex determining region on the Y chromosomeSinclair AH, Berta P, Palmer MS, Hawkins JR, Griffiths BL, Smith MJ, Foster JW, Frischauf A-M, Lovell-Badge R, Goodfellow PN: A gene from the human sex-determining region encodes a protein with homology to a conserved DNA-binding motif. Nature. 1990, 346: 240-244.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Koopman P, Munsterberg A, Capel B, Vivian N, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R: Expression of a candidate sex-determining gene during mouse testis differentiation. Nature. 1990, 348: 450-452.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Gubbay J, Koopman P, Collignon J, Burgoyne P, Lovell-Badge R: Normal structure and expression of Zfy genes in XY female mice mutant in Tdy. Development. 1990, 109 (3): 647-653.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Koopman P, Gubbay J, Vivian H, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R: Male development of chromosomally female mice transgenic for Sry. Nature. 1991, 351: 117-121.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Graves JA: Evolution of the testis-determining gene – the rise and fall of SRY. Novartis Found Symposium. 2002, 244: 86-97. discussion 97–101, 203–106, 253–107,Article
  Google Scholar
 Harley VR, Jackson DI, Hextall PJ, Hawkins JR, Berkovitz GD, Sockanathan S, Lovell-Badge R, Goodfellow PN: DNA Binding Activity of Recombinant SRY from Normal Males and XY Females. Science. 1992, 255 (5043): 453-456.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Whitfield LS, Lovell-Badge R, Goodfellow PN: Rapid sequence evolution of the mammalian sex-determining gene SRY. Nature. 1993, 364 (6439): 713-715.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Albrecht KH, Eicher EM: DNA sequence analysis of Sry alleles (subgenus Mus) implicates misregulation as the cause of C57BL/6J-Y(POS) sex reversal and defines the SRY functional unit. Genetics. 1997, 147 (3): 1267-1277.PubMed Central
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Albrecht KH, Young M, Washburn LL, Eicher EM: Sry expression level and protein isoform differences play a role in abnormal testis development in C57BL/6J mice carrying certain Sry alleles. Genetics. 2003, 164 (1): 277-288.PubMed Central
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Bullejos M, Koopman P: Delayed Sry and Sox9 expression in developing mouse gonads underlies B6-YDOM sex reversal. Developmental Biology. 2005, 278: 473-481.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Weitzman JB: Tracking evolution's footprints in the genome. J Biol. 2003, 2 (9–9.4):Loots GG, Locksley RM, Blankespoor CM, Wang ZE, Miller W, Rubin EM, Frazer KA: Identification of a coordinate regulator of interleukins 4, 13, and 5 by cross-species sequence comparisons. Science. 2000, 288 (5463): 136-140.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Boffelli D, McAuliffe J, Ovcharenko D, Lewis KD, Ovcharenko I, Pachter L, Rubin EM: Phylogenetic shadowing of primate sequences to find functional regions of the human genome. Science. 2003, 299 (5611): 1391-1394.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Boyer A, Pilon N, Raiwet DL, Lussier JG, Silversides DW: Human and pig SRY 5' flanking sequences can direct reporter transgene expression to the genital ridge and to migrating neural crest cells. Developmental Dynamics. 2006, 235 (3): 623-632.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Miziara MN, Riggs PK, Amaral ME: Comparative analysis of noncoding sequences of orthologous bovine and human gene pairs. Genet Mol Res. 2004, 3 (4): 465-73.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Nordhoff V, Hubner K, Bauer A, Orlova I, Malapetsa A, Scholer HR: Comparative analysis of human, bovine, and murine Oct-4 upstream promoter sequences. Mamm Genome. 2001, 12 (4): 309-317.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Liu WS, de Leon FA: Assignment of SRY, ANT3, and CSF2RA to the bovine Y chromosome by FISH and RH mapping. Animal Biotechnology. 2004, 15 (2): 103-109.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Pannetier M, Tilly G, Kocer A, Hudrisier M, Renault L, Chesnais N, Costa J, Le Provost F, Vaiman D, Vilotte JL, et al: Goat SRY induces testis development in XX transgenic mice. FEBS Lett. 2006, 580 (15): 3715-3720.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Pilon N, Daneau I, Paradis V, Hamel F, Lussier JG, Viger RS, Silversides DW: Porcine SRY promoter is a target for steroidogenic factor 1. Biology of Reproduction. 2003, 68 (4): 1098-1106.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Daneau I, Houde A, Ethier JF, Lussier JG, Silversides DW: Bovine SRY gene locus: cloning and testicular expression. Biology of Reproduction. 1995, 52 (3): 591-599.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Bullejos M, Koopman P: Spatially dynamic expression of Sry in mouse genital ridges. Developmental Dynamics. 2001, 221 (2): 201-205.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Hacker A, Capel B, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R: Expression of Sry, the mouse sex determining gene. Development. 1995, 121: 1603-1614.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Jeske YW, Bowles J, Greenfield A, Koopman P: Expression of a linear Sry transcript in the mouse genital ridge. Nature Genetics. 1995, 10 (4): 480-482.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Hanley NA, Hagan DM, Clement-Jones M, Ball SG, Strachan T, Salas-Cortes L, McElreavey K, Lindsay S, Robson S, Bullen P, et al: SRY, SOX9, and DAX1 expression patterns during human sex determination and gonadal development. Mechanisms of Development. 2000, 91 (1–2): 403-407.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Payen E, Pailhoux E, Abou Merhi R, Gianquinto L, Kirszenbaum M, Locatelli A, Cotinot C: Characterization of ovine SRY transcript and developmental expression of genes involved in sexual differentiation. International Journal of Developmental Biology. 1996, 40 (3): 567-575.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Parma P, Pailhoux E, Cotinot C: Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of genes involved in gonadal differentiation in pigs. Biology of Reproduction. 1999, 61 (3): 741-748.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Daneau I, Ethier JF, Lussier JG, Silversides DW: Porcine SRY gene locus and genital ridge expression. Biology of Reproduction. 1996, 55 (1): 47-53.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Margarit E, Guillen A, Rebordosa C, Vidal-Taboada J, Sanchez M, Ballesta F, Oliva R: Identification of Conserved Potentially Regulatory Sequences of the SRY Gene from 10 Different Species of Mammals. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998, 245 (2): 370-7.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Veitia RA, Fellous M, McElreavey K: Conservation of Y chromosome-specific sequences immediately 5' to the testis determining gene in primates. Gene. 1997, 199 (1–2): 63-70.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Poulat F, Desclozeaux M, Tuffery S, Jay P, Boizet B, Berta P: Mutation in the 5' noncoding region of the SRY gene in an XY sex-reversed patient. Hum Mutat. 1998, S192-194. Suppl 1,McElreavy K, Vilain E, Abbas N, Costa J-M, Souleyreau N, Kucheria K, Boucekine C, Thibaud E, Brauner R, Flamant F, et al: XY sex reversal associated with a deletion 5' to the SRY "HMG box" in the testis-determining region. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 1992, 89: 11016-11020.PubMed Central
  CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 de Santa Barbara P, Mejean C, Moniot B, Malcles MH, Berta P, Boizet-Bonhoure B: Steroidogenic factor-1 contributes to the cyclic-adenosine monophosphate down-regulation of human SRY gene expression. Biology of Reproduction. 2001, 64 (3): 775-783.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Desclozeaux M, Poulat F, de Santa Barbara P, Soullier S, Jay P, Berta P, Boizet-Bonhoure B: Characterization of two Sp1 binding sites of the human sex determining SRY promoter. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 1998, 1397 (3): 247-252.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Hossain A, Saunders GF: The human sex-determining gene SRY is a direct target of WT1. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2001, 276 (20): 16817-16823.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Ingraham HA, Lala DS, Ikeda Y, Luo X, Shen WH, Nachtigal MW, Abbud R, Nilson JH, Parker KL: The nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1 acts at multiple levels of the reproductive axis. Genes Dev. 1994, 8 (19): 2302-12.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Kreidberg JA, Sariola H, Loring JM, Maeda M, Pelletier J, Housman D, Jaenisch R: WT-1 is required for early kidney development. Cell. 1993, 74 (4): 679-691.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Shawlot W, Wakamiya M, Kwan KM, Kania A, Jessell TM, Behringer RR: Lim1 is required in both primitive streak-derived tissues and visceral endoderm for head formation in the mouse. Development. 1999, 126 (22): 4925-4932.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Birk OS, Casiano DE, Wassif CA, Cogliati T, Zhao L, Zhao Y, Grinberg A, Huang S, Kreidberg JA, Parker KL, et al: The LIM homeobox gene Lhx9 is essential for mouse gonad formation. Nature. 2000, 403 (6772): 909-913.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Molkentin JD, Olson EN: GATA4: a novel transcriptional regulator of cardiac hypertrophy?. Circulation. 1997, 96 (11): 3833-3835.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Delfino F, Walker WH: Stage-specific nuclear expression of NF-kappaB in mammalian testis. Molecular Endocrinology. 1998, 12 (11): 1696-1707.CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Houle M, Prinos P, Iulianella A, Bouchard N, Lohnes D: Retinoic acid regulation of Cdx1: an indirect mechanism for retinoids and vertebral specification. Mol Cell Biol. 2000, 20 (17): 6579-86.PubMed Central
  CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Bowles J, Knight D, Smith C, Wilhelm D, Richman J, Mamiya S, Yashiro K, Chawengsaksophak K, Wilson MJ, Rossant J, et al: Retinoid signaling determines germ cell fate in mice. Science. 2006, 312 (5773): 596-600.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 MacLean G, Li H, Metzger D, Chambon P, Petkovich M: Apoptotic extinction of germ cells in testes of Cyp26b1 knockout mice. Endocrinology. 2007, 148 (10): 4560-4567.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Subramanian V, Meyer BI, Gruss P: Disruption of the murine homeobox gene Cdx1 affects axial skeletal identities by altering the mesodermal expression domains of Hox genes. Cell. 1995, 83 (4): 641-653.CAS
  Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Brudno M, Malde S, Poliakov A, Do CB, Couronne O, Dubchak I, Batzoglou S: Glocal alignment: finding rearrangements during alignment. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 2003, 19 (Suppl 1): i54-62.Article
  Google Scholar
 Cartharius K, Frech K, Grote K, Klocke B, Haltmeier M, Klingenhoff A, Frisch M, Bayerlein M, Werner T: MatInspector and beyond: promoter analysis based on transcription factor binding sites. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 2005, 21 (13): 2933-2942.CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Download referencesWe thank Eric Pailhoux for the goat BAC clone, and Sean McWilliam for help with the comparative genomic and bioinformatic analyses. This work was supported by research grants from CSIRO Livestock Industries "Food Futures" flagship, the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, and the Australian Research Council (ARC). DF is supported by a CSIRO/IMB Postgraduate Research Award, and PK is a Federation Fellow of the ARC.Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072, AustraliaDiana GF Ross, Josephine Bowles & Peter KoopmanDivision of Livestock Industries, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Queensland Bioscience Precinct, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072, AustraliaDiana GF Ross & Sigrid LehnertCorrespondence to Peter Koopman.DR, JB, PK and SL designed the study. DR executed all of the experiments. DR, JB, PK and SL wrote and proof-read the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Below are the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Reprints and PermissionsRoss, D.G., Bowles, J., Koopman, P. et al. New insights into SRY regulation through identification of 5' conserved sequences. BMC Molecular Biol 9, 85 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2199-9-85Download citationReceived
14 April 2008Accepted
14 October 2008Published
14 October 2008DOI
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2199-9-85Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeAdvertisementISSN: 1471-2199By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, California Privacy Statement, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Manage cookies/Do not sell my data we use in the preference centre.© 2020 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.There is evidence that proopiomelanocortin (POMC)-derived peptides other than ACTH are involved in pituitary-dependent adrenal growth. We have synthesized the human N-terminal POMC fragment 1-28-POMC with the disulfide bridges in the correct position between cysteine residues 2–24 and 8–20 and studied the activity of these peptides in adrenocortical tumor cells in vitro. 1-28-POMC stimulated cell proliferation in human NCI-h295 and mouse Y-1 adrenal cancer cell lines and also in primary cultures of bovine adrenocortical cells in a concentration-dependent manner. 1-28-POMC led to rapid activation of the MAPKs extracellular signal-regulated kinases-1 and -2, but not c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38, pathways. Steroid hormone production (cortisol, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate) in NCI-h295 cells was decreased by 1-28-POMC in a concentration-dependent fashion. However, protein levels of important regulators of steroidogenesis [steroidogenic factor-1, DAX-1 (dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on the X-chromosome 1), steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, and cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme] remained unaffected by 1-28-POMC treatment. Our results provide evidence that synthetic 1-28-POMC induces adrenal tumor cell proliferation, inhibits adrenal steroidogenesis, and mediates its action by signaling via the extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway. The distinct roles of 1-28-POMC and ACTH in the regulation of adrenal growth and steroidogenesis suggest that the adrenal cortex is under the dual opposing control of fragments from the same mother peptide POMC.THE PATHOGENESIS OF adrenocortical carcinoma is poorly understood. There is little known about the proliferative pathways that are involved in adrenal tumor growth. Only a few adrenal mitogens have been identified, of which basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and IGF-I and -II are the most widely studied (1–10). Pituitary-derived factors play a crucial role in adrenal growth, as hypophysectomy leads to adrenal atrophy, whereas chronic adrenal overstimulation, e.g. in Cushing’s disease, causes adrenal hyperplasia (11–14). Accordingly, long-standing hypersecretion of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) in patients with inadequately treated congenital adrenal hyperplasia can cause adrenal tumor formation (15, 16).Based on experiments using purified ACTH to prevent adrenal atrophy in dexamethasone-treated hypophysectomized animals, ACTH has been proposed to be the major trophic and mitogenic stimulus for the adrenal cortex (12, 17, 18). This view is supported by the observation that inactivating mutations of the ACTH receptor are associated with adrenocortical hypoplasia (19). However, there is clear evidence that ACTH has antimitogenic activity in vitro (20, 21). Moreover, in vivo experiments with immunoneutralized ACTH demonstrated that ACTH has no role in compensatory adrenal growth after unilateral adrenalectomy (22). These findings led to the concept that other peptides of pituitary origin are probably involved in the control of adrenal proliferation. In the 1980s, Lowry and co-workers (22–24) demonstrated adrenal mitogenic activity of peptides derived from the N terminus of POMC (N-POMC). Although human 1-76-POMC (pro-γMSH), the major N-terminal POMC peptide secreted by pituitary corticotrophs, had no trophic effect on the adrenals (25), shorter N-POMC peptides, not containing the γMSH sequence, showed mitogenic activity. This was demonstrated in vivo by administration of 1-28-POMC to intact rats (23) and to hypophysectomized rats after enucleation of the adrenals (24, 26). In addition, antisera against 1-48-POMC were shown to inhibit compensatory adrenal growth after unilateral adrenalectomy (22), and incubation with 1-28-POMC led to an increase in [3H]thymidine incorporation in cultured rat adrenocortical cells (23). It was suggested that 1-76-POMC undergoes postsecretional cleavage resulting in the generation of smaller N-POMC peptides with mitogenic activity (22, 23), and recently an adrenal serine protease specifically cleaving rat POMC has been identified (27).Although these observations offer an attractive explanation for seemingly conflicting experimental data, the evidence was based on the use of pituitary extracts possibly contaminated by ill-defined peptides and has not yet been confirmed using synthetic peptides. Moreover, as pituitary extracts are scarce, further investigations in this field have virtually ceased until recently (28, 29). A major problem with results from earlier studies investigating the mitogenic activity of N-POMC is the use of synthetic peptides with undefined disulfide bonds (30). The disulfide bridge arrangement of native N-POMC has been unambiguously determined (30, 31) and is crucial for its biological activity (32, 33).We have synthesized 1-28-POMC with Cys2-Cys24 and Cys8-Cys20 disulfide bridges corresponding to the structure of endogenous POMC and used this peptide to study its effects on proliferation and steroidogenesis in adrenocortical tumor cells. Our findings support the concept that potent adrenal mitogenic activity resides in the extreme N terminus of POMC.RPMI 1640, MEM, fetal calf serum (FCS), horse serum, BSA, antibiotics, and trypan blue were supplied by Invitrogen (Eggenstein, Germany). IGF-I, bFGF, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide (MTT), antibiotics, DMEM/Ham’s F-12, collagenase II, deoxyribonuclease I, insulin, transferrin, selenium, glutamine, HEPES, and Percoll were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (Deisenhofen, Germany). Synthetic ACTH1–24 was purchased from Novartis Pharma (Nuernberg, Germany); UO 126 was obtained from Promega Corp. (Mannheim, Germany). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 (ERK-1), ERK-2, total ERK, DAX-1 (dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on the X-chromosome 1), and steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA); mouse anti-β-actin was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Corp., and antirabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) and antimouse IgG was purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech (Little Chalfont, UK). Antibodies against phosphorylated JNK, phosphorylated p38, and p38 were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Frankfurt, Germany).Rabbit antibodies against cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc) (34) and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) (35) were gifts from W. Miller (University of California, San Francisco, CA). Recombinant rat 1-74-POMC (36) was provided by C. Denef (University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium).1-28-POMC and 1-48-POMC were synthesized by standard solid phase chemistry on a TentaGel trityl-Leu-F-moc resin (Rapp Polymere; substitution level, 0.23 mmol/g) at a scale of 0.1 mmol on a 433A peptide synthesizer (PE Applied Biosystems, Weiterstadt, Germany) (37). Activation of F-moc-protected amino acids was carried out with 2-(1H-benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate. To selectively introduce the two disulfide bonds, cysteine residues in positions 2 and 24 were trityl-protected, while cysteines in positions 8 and 20 were acetamidomethyl-protected. Residues 16–18 (Asn, Leu, Leu) were double-coupled. For cleavage and deprotection, the dry peptidyl resin was treated with trifluoroacetic acid/ethanedithiol/water (94:3:3, vol/vol/vol) for 3 h. The crude product was precipitated by adding cold tert-butylmethylether. The material obtained was dried, dissolved in water, filtered, and prepurified by preparative reverse phase HPLC (Vydac C18, The Separations Group, Hesperia, CA). The molecular mass determined by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESIMS) was 3341.8 Da, exactly corresponding to the calculated value. Fractions containing the reduced product were lyophilized (yield, 360 mg) and subsequently subjected to oxidation at room temperature for 70 h. The peptide concentration was 0.5 mg/ml, and pH was adjusted to 7.8 with diluted ammonia. The resulting solution was directly loaded onto a preparative reverse phase C18 HPLC column (Vydac, 300 Å, 15–20 μm), and the monocyclic intermediate containing a Cys2-Cys24 disulfide was isolated. The molecular mass determined by ESIMS was 3339.3 Da (calculated, 3339.8 Da). To cleave acetamidomethyl groups and to introduce the second disulfide bond, 25 mg monocyclic peptide were dissolved in a mixture of acetic acid and 0.1 M HCl (4:1, vol/vol), and treated with 20 equivalents of iodine for 2 h at room temperature. Excess iodine was reduced by the addition of fresh sodium ascorbate solution. The resulting mixture was diluted with water (1:1) and subjected to a final reverse phase HPLC purification on a Vydac C18 column. The product-containing fractions were combined and lyophilized (yield: 19.5 mg). The product was shown to be homogeneous by analytical C18 HPLC [Vydac, 250 × 4.6 mm, 300 Å, 5 μm; eluent A, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water; eluent B, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile/water (4:1); linear gradient, 10–70% B in 30 min; flow rate, 0.8 ml/min; UV detection at 215 nm]. The molecular mass determined by ESIMS was 3195.4 Da (calculated, 3195.6 Da).The human adrenocortical cancer cell line NCI-h295 (38) was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Adherent cells were maintained in DMEM/Ham’s F-12 medium supplemented with transferrin, insulin, selenium, and 5% FCS as described previously (39). The cells were grown at 37 C under an atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air. For experiments the FCS concentration was reduced to a maximum of 2%.The mouse adrenocortical cancer cell line Y-1 (40) was obtained from Cell Line Service (Heidelberg, Germany). The adherent cells were maintained in Ham’s F-10 medium supplemented with 2.5% FCS, 7.5% horse serum, and 200 nM L-glutamine. The cells were grown at 37 C under an atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air. For experiments, the serum concentration was reduced to a maximum of 2%.The primary culture of bovine adrenocortical cells was performed as described in detail by Weber and Michl (41). Briefly, adrenal glands from 2- to 3-yr-old steers were obtained from the local slaughterhouse. The tissue was dissected and cells of the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis were obtained by digestion with collagenase II and deoxyribonuclease I. To purify dissociated cells and to remove contaminating red blood cells and cell debris, a Percoll centrifugation was performed. After washing, the final cell pellet was resuspended in DMEM/Ham’s F-12 medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 5% horse serum, and antibiotics. Cells were plated in 75-cm2 flasks in a concentration of 106 cells/ml. Medium was changed after 24 h to remove cell debris and unattached cells. During the following days, medium was replenished every 24–48 h. Seventy-two hours after seeding, cells were incubated with different concentrations of 1-28-POMC or 10 nM ACTH, respectively.In all proliferation experiments IGF-I (10 nM) or bFGF (10 nM) served as the positive control.Cells were seeded at an initial concentration of 106 cells/ml in six-well cell culture plates. Peptides were added at the specified concentrations. At various time points viability was determined by trypan blue staining (42). The total number of viable cells excluding the dye was calculated, and the percentage of viable cells recovered in the treatment groups was determined by comparison with untreated control cells.In this assay the tetrazolium salt MTT is converted to a colored formazan product by enzymes active only in living cells (43). Cells were seeded into 96-well microtiter plates at a density of 50,000 cells/well. Twenty-four hours after inoculation, 1-28-POMC (final concentration, 1 nM to 10 μM) was added to the wells (n = 8 replicates). The cells were then incubated for an additional 72–96 h, followed by addition of MTT reagent (5 mg/ml stock solution) to a final concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. After incubation at 37 C for 3 h, the product was dissolved by addition of 100 μl cell lysis buffer (isopropanol with HCl), and absorbance of the lysate was measured at 570 nm using an ELISA plate reader (400 SF, SLT Lab Instruments, Crailsheim, Germany).Both NCI-h295 and Y-1 cells, were starved (36 h without serum). Thereafter, cells were incubated for 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, and 60 min with 1-28-POMC, and proteins were extracted according to the Laemmli method (44) in a lysis buffer containing bromophenol blue (0.04%), glycerol (10%), sodium dodecyl sulfate (2%), 2-mercaptoethanol (5%), and Tris base (0.0625 M), pH 6.8. Equal amounts of lysates were electrophoresed on 10% polyacrylamide-sodium dodecyl sulfate gels at 150 V for 1 h. SDS-PAGE-resolved proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane by a tank-blotting procedure. The membrane was treated with blocking buffer (5% nonfat dry milk dissolved in PBS containing 0.02% Tween 20) for 60 min, followed by overnight probing with the different specific antibodies against phosphorylated ERK-1 and -2 (pERK-1 and-2; 1:1000), total ERK-1 and -2 (1:1000), phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (1:1000), phosphorylated p38 (1:1000), and total p38 (1:1000) at 4 C. All antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer. After three washes with 5% nonfat dry milk dissolved in PBS containing 0.02% Tween 20, the membrane was incubated for 1 h with horseradish peroxidase-labeled goat antirabbit (1:3000) or antimouse (1:1500) IgG as secondary antibody. The nitrocellulose sheet was then washed three times for 10 min each time, and the antigen-antibody complex was visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence using a Western blotting detection kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). NCI-h295 cells were also stimulated for 15 min with 1-28-POMC after preincubation (60 min) with the MEK kinase inhibitor UO 126 (0.5–25 μM), and pERK-1 and -2 and total ERK-1 and -2 were analyzed. Normalization of the levels of phosphorylated protein was performed by reprobing the blot with an antibody recognizing total ERK-1 and -2.NCI-h295 cells were incubated with 1000 nM 1-28-POMC for 1, 6, 12, 18, and 72 h, and total protein was extracted as described above. Protein levels of StAR, P450scc, DAX-1, and SF-1 were detected by Western blotting using specific antibodies in dilutions of 1:15000, 1:1000; 1:200, and 1:2400, respectively. For normalization, the blots were stripped and reprobed with an antibody against β-actin (1:5000), followed by incubation with horseradish peroxidase-labeled antimouse IgG.The relative intensity of the signals was quantified by scanning densitometry using the Image Gauge V3.4 (Fujifilm, Düsseldorf, Germany) and normalized against β-actin.NCI-h295 cells and bovine adrenocortical cells were incubated for 48 h with 1-28-POMC (10–1000 nM). Each experiment was performed in triplicate. In bovine adrenocortical cells, incubation with 10 nM ACTH with and without 100 nM 1-28-POMC was performed. At the end of the incubation period, steroid hormones [cortisol, 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OH-P), and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), respectively] were determined in the cell supernatants by commercially available RIAs (DPC Biermann, Bad Nauheim, Germany). The intra- and interassay coefficients of variation were less than 8% and less than 12%, respectively, for all assays.Significance of differences was evaluated by ANOVA using the statistical software program StatView 4.51. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant, with post hoc analysis carried out by Fisher’s protected least significant difference test. Each experiment was performed with three replicates (MTT assays with eight). All results are expressed as the mean ± SD. Data given are from one representative experiment. Similar results were obtained in at least three experiments.In the human adrenocortical cancer cell line NCI-h295, treatment with 1-28-POMC led to a significant concentration-dependent increase in cell proliferation to 131% of unstimulated cells as measured by MTT assay (Fig. 1A). This effect was paralleled by an increase in cell number to 148% of unstimulated cells, as determined by trypan blue staining (10 nM 1-28-POMC, 1.43 ± 0.12 × 106; 1000 nM 1-28-POMC, 1.63 ± 0.06 × 106; untreated control cells, 1.10 ± 0.10 × 106 vital cells/well; P < 0.001; Fig. 1B). On a molar basis, the proliferative activity of 1-28-POMC was comparable or superior to that of the established adrenal mitogens IGF-I or bFGF (Fig. 1).Concentration- and time-dependent effect of 1-28-POMC on cell viability and proliferation in the human NCI-H295 cell line as measured by the MTT assay (A) and cell counting after trypan blue staining (B). Cells were treated with 10–1000 nM 1-28-POMC or 10 nM IGF-I and 10 nM bFGF as indicated (for details, see Materials and Methods). Results in A are the percentage of untreated control cells (100%) and are the mean ± SD of eight wells; in B, cell number per well (mean ± SD of three dishes) is given. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01 (treatment groups vs. untreated controls at the same time point); #, P < 0.05 (10 nM 1-28-POMC vs. 1000 nM 1-28-POMC). Similar results were obtained in three experiments.In mouse Y-1 adrenocortical cancer cells, 1-28-POMC caused a significant concentration- and time-dependent increase in cell proliferation. The absorbance in the MTT assay after incubation with 1-28-POMC of Y-1 cells for 4 d increased concentration-dependently (1 nM, 127 ± 14; 100 nM, 137 ± 18; 10 μM, 162 ± 10; untreated control cells, 100 ± 22; P < 0.001 for all vs. control cells; Fig. 2A), with a time-dependent significant increase in cell number after 3 and 6 d for 10 and 1000 nM 1-28-POMC (Fig. 2B). After 6 d, vital cell numbers in cells treated with 100 nM and 10 μM 1-28-POMC reached 123 ± 9% and 136 ± 8%, respectively, in comparison with untreated control cells.Concentration- and time-dependent effect of 1-28-POMC on cell viability and proliferation in the mouse Y-1 cell line as measured by the MTT assay (A) and cell counting after trypan blue staining (B). Cells were treated with 1 nM to 10 μM 1-28-POMC as indicated or 10 nM IGF-I (for details, see Materials and Methods). Results in A are the percentage of untreated control cells (100%) and are the mean ± SD of eight wells. **, P < 0.01 (treatment groups vs. untreated controls); #, P < 0.01 (10 μMvs. 1 and 100 nM 1-28-POMC). In B, cell number per well (mean ± SD of three dishes) is given. *, P < 0.05 (treatment groups vs. untreated controls at the same time point). Similar results were obtained in three experiments.The proliferation index in the MTT assay also increased significantly after 72 h of treatment with 1-28-POMC in nonneoplastic bovine adrenocortical cells in primary culture (10 nM 1-28-POMC, 168 ± 15%; 1000 nM 1-28-POMC, 179 ± 11%; untreated control cells, 100 ± 14%; P < 0.001 for all vs. control cells). In contrast, incubation with ACTH (10 nM) led to a significant decrease in the proliferation index to 80 ± 4% of that observed in control cells (P < 0.05).In addition, we investigated the activity of larger N-POMC peptides, 1-48-POMC and recombinant rat 1-74-POMC, on adrenal tumor cell proliferation. Incubation of NCI-h295 cells with all three N-POMC fragments stimulated the proliferation index in the MTT assay in a significant manner (Fig. 3). There were no significant differences between the N-POMC peptides. Similar results were seen in Y-1 cells, thereby demonstrating that the proliferative activity of N-POMC depends on the extreme N terminus, 1-28-POMC, which we, therefore, termed adrenoproliferin.Effects of synthetic human 1-28-POMC and 1-48-POMC and recombinant rat 1-74-POMC on cell viability and proliferation in the human NCI-h295 cell line as measured by the MTT assay. Cells were treated with 10 nM of the different N-POMC peptides or with 10 nM IGF-I (for details, see Materials and Methods). Results are the percentage of untreated control cells (100%) and are the mean ± SD of eight wells. **, P < 0.01 (treatment groups vs. untreated controls).To further characterize the proliferative effect of 1-28-POMC, we analyzed its impact on intracellular signaling pathways, which elicit transcriptional and nontranscriptional events required for cell cycle entry. Previous work has demonstrated the critical role of the Ras-Raf-MAPK kinase (MEK)-ERK cascade in this process (45, 46). Activation of the MAPK ERK-1 and -2 depends on the phosphorylation of critical amino acids by upstream kinases, which can be visualized using phosphorylation-specific antibodies. Similar to treatment with the mitogen IGF-I, incubation with 1-28-POMC resulted in a time-dependent activation of ERK-1 and -2 in both adrenocortical tumor cell lines, NCI-h295 and Y-1 (Fig. 4). Maximum phosphorylation was detected between 10–20 min after stimulation with 1-28 POMC. In contrast, phosphorylation of JNK and p38, which normally do not or only poorly respond to mitogenic stimuli (47), was not found to be altered. Activation of ERK-1 and -2 requires a dual specificity upstream kinase (MEK), which, in turn, represents the only in vivo substrate known to date for the protein serine/threonine kinases of the Raf family (48). Recently, U0126 has been identified as a specific inhibitor of the signal transfer from Raf to MEK (49). In our experiments the involvement of this signaling cascade was demonstrated by the inhibition of 1-28-POMC-induced phosphorylation of ERK by UO 126 (Fig. 5) in the NCI-h295 cell line. Thus, adrenoproliferin specifically activates the MEK pathway with downstream signaling via ERK-1 and ERK-2, but not JNK and p38, pathways.Effect of 1-28-POMC on MAPK in the human NCI-h295 cell line. Cells were starved (36 h without serum) and thereafter stimulated with 1000 nM 1-28-POMC (5–60 min) or 1000 nM IGF-I (15 min). Western blot analysis was performed as described in Materials and Methods with specific antibodies against phosphorylated ERK-1 and -2, phosphorylated JNK, phosphorylated p38, total ERK-1/2, and total p38.Effect of the MEK inhibitor UO 126 on 1-28-POMC-induced phosphorylated ERK-1 and -2 in the human NCI-h295 cell line. Cells were stimulated with 1000 nM 1-28-POMC for 15 min with or without preincubation for 60 min with 0.5 or 5 μM UO 126. Western blotting was performed as described in Materials and Methods with specific antibodies against phosphorylated ERK-1 and -2 and total ERK.Forty-eight hours of incubation with 1-28-POMC in NCI-h295 cells led to a concentration-dependent reduction of cortisol, 17-OH-P, and DHEA-S in NCI-h295 cell supernatants (Fig. 6). In contrast, IGF-I and bFGF did not decrease hormone secretion (data not shown). Similar results were obtained in primary culture of bovine adrenocortical cells (cortisol: 1000 nM 1-28-POMC, 47 ± 3%; control cells, 100 ± 22% (P < 0.01); 17-OH-P: 1000 nM 1-28-POMC, 58 ± 8%; control cells, 100 ± 16% (P < 0.01)]. In addition, 1-28-POMC significantly attenuated (P < 0.05) the ACTH-induced cortisol increase in bovine adrenocortical cells (100 nM 1-28-POMC plus 10 nM ACTH, 295 ± 9%; 10 nM ACTH, 337 ± 29%; untreated control cells, 100 ± 12%).Effects of 1-28-POMC on steroidogenesis in the human NCI-h-295 cell line. Cells were treated for 48 h with 1-28-POMC (10–1000 nM). Cortisol, 17-OH-P, and DHEA-S were measured in cell supernatant by RIA. Hormone secretion in untreated control cells was 17.5 ± 0.4, 8.7 ± 0.5, and 37.9 ± 4.8 ng/106 cells, respectively. Results are the percentage of untreated control cells (100%) and are the mean ± SD of three dishes. **, P < 0.01 (treatment groups vs. untreated controls). Similar results were obtained in three experiments.The observed decrease in steroid secretion suggested a general suppressive effect of 1-28-POMC on steroidogenesis. Therefore, we investigated the protein levels of the two first and rate-limiting steps in steroidogenesis, StAR and side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc), and of two important transcription factors that are involved in the regulation of steroidogenesis, SF-1 and DAX-1. Incubation of the NCI-h295 cells with 1-28-POMC for 1–72 h did not lead to a significant change in protein expression of StAR and P450scc (Fig. 7). The protein levels of the nuclear receptors SF-1 and DAX-1 also remained unaffected by 1-28-POMC after incubation of NCI-h295 cells for 1–72 h (Fig. 7).Effects of 1-28-POMC on steroidogenic enzymes and nuclear factors in the human NCI-h295 cell line. Cells were incubated with 1000 nM 1-28-POMC for 1–12 h. Western blotting was performed as described in Materials and Methods with specific antibodies against StAR, P450scc, DAX-1, and SF-1. Specific bands were seen at 32, 53, 53, and 50 kDa, respectively. Experiments were performed in triplicate, and blots were stripped and reprobed with an antibody against β-actin (data not shown). No significant changes in protein level were detectable.The successful synthesis of 1-28-POMC and 1-48-POMC with the physiological disulfide bridges Cys2-Cys24 and Cys8-Cys20 provided us with a tool to analyze the effects of N-POMC peptides in adrenocortical tumor cells. We found a concentration-dependent increase in cell number after treatment with synthetic 1-28-POMC in two adrenocortical tumor cell lines from different species (human and mouse) and also in primary cultures of normal bovine adrenocortical cells. Thus, our study supports the concept proposed by Lowry and co-workers in the 1980s (23) that the pituitary-derived trophic and mitogenic stimulus for the adrenal cortex resides, at least in part, in the N terminus of POMC. Using pituitary extracts, this group demonstrated stimulation of adrenal growth in rats in vivo by 1-28-POMC (22, 24, 26). They found an increase in [3H]thymidine incorporation in rat adrenocortical cells and quenching of compensatory adrenal growth by antibodies raised against 1-48-POMC. More recently, Ross et al. (29) reported that intrafetal infusion of bovine 1-77-POMC in sheep resulted in an increased adrenal weight compared with saline-infused sheep, suggesting an important role of 1-77-POMC for fetal adrenal growth. This view is further supported by the study by Saphier et al. (50), who observed 1-77-POMC concentrations 10–50 times higher than those of ACTH in the circulation of fetal sheep. In addition, ACTH exerts inhibitory activity on the proliferation of normal adrenal cells in vitro (51–53), which is in keeping with our results.The most widely studied adrenal growth factors are bFGF and IGF-I/II. At present, bFGF is regarded as the most potent adrenal mitogen and has been studied in a variety of in vitro systems, including human NCI-h295 cells (10), mouse Y-1 cells (20), cultured bovine adrenocortical cells (54, 55), and human fetal adrenocortical cells (7, 56–58). However, the responses of normal adrenal cells and adrenocortical tumor cells to growth stimulators have been invariably moderate. As rather differentiated cells, adrenal tumor cells grow slowly and respond only moderately to mitogenic stimuli. The maximum effect reported in NCI-h295 cells was an increase in cell number to 138% of controls after 7 d of treatment with bFGF (10). The activity of IGF-I is comparable and has been observed not only in bovine adrenocortical cells (3, 6) and fetal adrenocortical cells (4, 7), but also in NCI-295 cells (59). The concentrations of IGF-I and bFGF used in our studies and the resulting increases in cell number are in agreement with these reports. As the effect of N-POMC peptides observed in our experiments is on the same order of magnitude, it is likely that stimulation of adrenal growth by N-POMC is physiologically relevant. The N-POMC peptide concentrations used in this study are higher then expected in the circulation, although in some situations plasma concentrations of N-POMC may be 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than plasma ACTH concentrations. However, based on the experience with ACTH effects on adrenocortical cells in vitro it seemed prudent to use concentrations at least in the range commonly used for the study of ACTH action (60–63). Clearly, more work is required to define the physiological role of N-POMC in the multitude of factors involved in adrenal proliferation in vivo.At present, it is uncertain which POMC-derived peptide is the physiological adrenoproliferin. In our hands, human 1-28-POMC, 1-48-POMC, and recombinant rat 1-74-POMC were equally potent in adrenocortical tumor cells, indicating that the mitogenic activity resides in the extreme N terminus. This part of POMC is highly conserved between species, indicating that the hairpin structure of the molecule serves an important physiological role. Intriguingly, the administration of either 1-28-POMC or 2-59-POMC stimulated adrenal growth in vivo and vitro in rats (22, 23), whereas human 1-76-POMC was inactive (25). These observations suggest that cleavage of human 1-76-POMC is required to generate mitogenically active peptides. This hypothesis is supported by the recent discovery and cloning of a serine protease [adrenal secretory protease (AsP)], which is up-regulated in the adrenal during compensatory adrenal growth and is capable of cleaving human 1-76-POMC into shorter fragments (27).On the other hand, in fetal sheep only full-length bovine 1-77-POMC increased adrenal weight, whereas the smaller N-terminal peptide 1-49-POMC was inactive. Possibly glycosylation protects 1-77-POMC from rapid proteolytic degradation in the circulation, whereas smaller nonglycosylated peptides such as 1-49-POMC may be relatively labile in vivo. The importance of the glycosylation status of N-POMC has recently been shown by Bert et al. (36). In lactotroph cells, natural glycosylated human 1-76-POMC did not stimulate the MC-3 receptor, whereas recombinant nonglycosylated rat 1-74-POMC did. Thus, the stimulation of adrenal cell proliferation by recombinant rat 1-74-POMC in our study may reflect the lack of glycosylation. Alternatively, tumor cells may express sufficient amounts of AsP to cleave full-length N-POMC to generate mitogenic activity in vitro, as it has been shown that Y-1 cells express AsP (27).Our report sheds the first light on some components of signal transduction involved in the trophic activity mediated by 1-28-POMC. These are major mitogenic/antiapoptotic pathways, which are also activated by the administration of IGF-I. There is evidence that bFGF, endothelin, and adrenomedullin mediate at least some of their actions via the ERK cascade (64–66). There are conflicting data on the effect of ACTH on activation of ERK kinases. In Y1 cells, a short pulse of ACTH induced rapid activation of ERK (63) and accumulation of c-Fos protein (67), suggesting a growth-promoting effect of ACTH, whereas continuous treatment with ACTH (14 h) inhibited cell cycle progression via a cAMP-dependent pathway (67). However, it has also been shown that ACTH antagonizes the mitogenic action of bFGF in Y1 cells and is rather a poor activator of ERK kinases (68). Recently, Lotfi et al. (69) reported clear activation of ERK kinases by a commercial preparation of porcine pituitary corticotropin A, whereas synthetic 1-39-ACTH and 1-24-ACTH were largely inactive. Fractionation of the pituitary extract revealed multiple peaks including γMSH and βMSH, with variable activity concerning ERK activation. They concluded that this activation of ERK kinases resulted from unknown contaminating peptides (69), which, in the light of our results, may well have been N-terminal fragments of POMC. Watanabe et al. (70) demonstrated that synthetic ACTH decreases ERK activity in rats in vivo while inducing the JNK pathway. Activation of JNK has been linked to negative growth regulation and induction of apoptosis (71) and could, therefore, be related to the inhibitory activity of ACTH on adrenal growth. From these observations partially opposing activities of ACTH and 1-28-POMC in adrenocortical cells can be derived: 1-28 POMC activates ERK-1/ERK-2, leaving JNK activity unaltered, whereas ACTH increases JNK and has minor or even negative effects on ERK activation. Further elucidation of 1-28-POMC signal transduction is of major interest, as constitutive activation of these pathways may be involved in adrenal tumorigenesis.There have been conflicting reports on the effects of N-POMC-derived peptides on steroid production. Pedersen and Brownie (72) observed that 16-kDa N-POMC, a glycosylated fragment prepared from the mouse pituitary tumor cell line AtT-20, stimulated steroidogenesis in isolated rat adrenocortical cells. This effect was enhanced by trypsinization, suggesting that this activity is restricted to a fragment of 16 kDa POMC (73). Further studies by these researchers suggested that this stimulative effect is related to Lys-γ3MSH (rat 50-74-POMC) (73). In contrast, Jornot et al. (74) showed no effect of the 16-kDa fragment in isolated rat adrenal cells, and Cathiard et al. (75) demonstrated no change in the presence of γ3MSH in bovine adrenal cells. Al-Dujaili et al. (76, 77) observed ACTH-potentiating effects of the naturally occurring human N-POMC glycopeptide on steroidogenesis in perfused rat and human adrenal cells. This effect was delayed and required a priming dose of N-POMC. A small enhancing effect of the small 16-kDa fragment of POMC on cortisol production was also observed more recently in guinea pig adrenal cells (78). There are several possible explanations for these conflicting reports. It is to be assumed that the steroidogenesis-enhancing activity resides in the C-terminus of N-POMC. Thus, depending on the experimental system used, variable activities of N-terminal 16-kDa POMC fragment preparations may lead to variable effects on steroidogenesis. Moreover, contamination by undetermined peptides and species differences may also have contributed to the conflicting findings. The use of synthetic 1-28-POMC fully excludes interfering steroidogenic activities of other N-POMC fragments and thereby unmasks the inhibitory potential of the extreme N terminus of POMC on steroidogenesis.The concordant inhibitory effect of 1-28-POMC on all steroids measured suggests a general suppressive effect rather than inhibition of a specific steroidogenic enzyme. Protein levels of StAR, P450scc, DAX-1, and SF-1 remained unaffected by 1-28-POMC. However, we cannot exclude that posttranslational modifications such as changes in phosphorylation may contribute to the inhibitory action of 1-28-POMC on steroidogenesis. In contrast to our findings, Coulter et al. (28) found suppression of StAR mRNA by 1-77-POMC in fetal sheep in vivo. However, they did not investigate protein levels. Although their findings in fetal sheep differ from our observation in vitro, they also point to an inhibitory potential of N-POMC on steroidogenesis.In differentiated thyroid carcinoma, suppression of TSH secretion is an established therapeutic principle to inhibit the growth of tumor cells and maintain clinical remission (79). It is uncertain whether a similar concept holds true also in adrenocortical cancer. Our data suggest that suppression of POMC secretion may potentially inhibit the growth of some adrenocortical carcinomas. Such inhibition of POMC secretion would be easily achievable by administration of exogenous glucocorticoids. However, any possible benefit must be balanced against the side-effects of glucocorticoid-induced POMC suppression.In conclusion, we demonstrate for the first time that synthetic physiological 1-28-POMC and 1-48-POMC are adrenal mitogens that act via activation of MAPKs while simultaneously attenuating steroidogenesis. The distinct activities of 1-28-POMC and ACTH indicate that the adrenal cortex may be under the dual opposing control of fragments from the same mother peptide.We thank Dr. C. Denef (Leuven, Belgium) for providing recombinant rat 1-74-POMC and Dr. W. Miller (San Francisco, CA) for antibodies against P450scc and StaR.This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Grant Al 203/7-1, to B.A.).Present address for J.T.: Daniel-Swarovski Research Lab, Department of Surgery, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.Adrenal secretory protease;basic fibroblast growth factor;dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on the X-chromosome 1;dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate;electrospray ionization mass spectrometry;fetal calf serum;immunoglobulin G;c-Jun N-terminal kinase;MAPK kinase;3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide;N-terminal proopiomelanocortin;17-hydroxyprogesterone;cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme;proopiomelanocortin;steroidogenic factor 1;steroidogenic acute regulatory protein.Google ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarGoogle ScholarOxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwideAdvertisementHuman Genetics
 97, 
701–704(1996)Cite this article140 Accesses14 Citations0 AltmetricMetricsH-Y antigen is defined as a male histocompatibility antigen that causes rejection of male skin grafts by female recipients of the same inbred strain of rodents. Male-specific, or H-Y antigen(s), are also detected by cytotoxic T cells and antibodies. H-Y antigen appears to be an integral part of the membrane of most male cells. In addition, H-Y antibodies detect a soluble form of H-Y that is secreted by the testis. The gene (Smcy/SMCY) coding for H-Y antigen detected by T cells has been cloned. It is expressed ubiquitously in male mice and humans, and encodes an epitope that triggers a specific T -cell response in vitro. Additional epitopes coded for by different Y-chromosomal genes are probably required in vivo for the rejection of male grafts by female hosts. The molecular nature of H-Y antigen detected by antibodies on most male cells is not yet known. Testis-secreted, soluble H-Y antigen, however, was found to be identical to Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS). MIS cross-reacts with H-Y antibodies and identical findings were obtained for soluble H-Y antigen and MIS, i.e., secretion by testicular Sertoli and, to a lesser degree, ovarian cells, binding to a gonad-specific receptor, induction of gonadal sex reversal in vitro and, in cattle, in vivo. H-Y antisera also detect a molecule or molecules associated with the heterogametic sex in nonmammalian vertebrates. Molecular data on this antigen or antigens are not yet available.This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.Agulnik AI, Mitchell MJ, Lerner JL, Woods DR, Bishop CE (1994a) A mouse Y chromosome gene encoded by a region essential for spermatogenesis and expression of male-specific minor histocompatibility antigens. Hum Mol Genet 3:873–878CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Agulnik AI, Mitchell MJ, Mattei M-G, Borsani G, Avner PA, Lerner JL, Bishop CE (1994b) A novel X gene with a widely transcribed Y-linked homologue escapes X-inactivation in mouse and human. Hum Mol Genet 3:879–884CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Baarends WM, Helmond MJL van, Post M, Schoot PJCM van der, Hoogerbrugge JW, Winter JP de, Uilenbroek JTJ, Karels B, Wilming LG, Meijers JHC, Themmen APN, Grootegoed JA (1994) A novel member of the transmembrane serine/threonine kinase receptor family is specifically expressed in the gonads and in mesenchymal cells adjacent to the Müllerian duct. Development 120:189–197CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Behringer RR, Cate RL, Froelick GR, Palmiter RD, Brinster RL (1990) Abnormal sexual development in transgenic mice chronically expressing Müllerian inhibiting substance. Nature 345:167–170Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Brunner M, Moreira-Filho CA, Wachtel G, Wachtel SS (1984) On the secretion of H-Y antigen. Cell 37:615–619Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Crumeyrolle-Arias M, Zaborski P, Scheib D, Latouche J, Aschheim P (1986) Differentiation of Sertoli-like cells in senescent ovaries of both intact and hypophysectomized rats and its relation to ovarian H-Y antigen expression. Mod Trends Aging Res 147:117–126Google Scholar
 Eichwald EJ, Silmser CR (1955) Untitled communication. Transplant Bull 2:148–149CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Ferguson-Smith MA (1966) X-Y chromosomal interchange in the aetiology of true hermaphroditism and of XX Klinefelter's syndrome. Lancet II:475–476Google Scholar
 Gasser DL, Silvers WK (1972) Genetics and immunology of sexlinked antigens. Adv Immunol 15:215–247CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Goldberg EH, Boyse EA, Bennett D, Scheid M, Carswell EA (1971) Serological demonstration of H-Y (male) antigen on mouse sperm. Nature 232:478–480Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Goldberg EH, Shen F, Tokuda S (1973) Detection of H-Y (male) antigen on mouse lymph node cells by the cell to cell cytotoxicity test. Transplantation 15:334–336CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Gordon RD, Simpson E, Samuelson LE (1975) In vitro cell-mediated immune responses to the male specific (H-Y) antigen in mice. J Exp Med 142:1108–1120Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Imbeaud S, Faure E, Lamarre I, Mattbi M-G, Clemente N di, Tizard R, Carré-Eusèbe D, Belville C, Tragethon L, Tonkin C, Nelson J, McAuliffe M, Bidart J-M, Lababidi A, Josso N, Cate RL, Picard J-Y (1995) Insensitivity to anti-Müllerian hormone due to a mutation in the human anti-Müllerian hormone receptor. Nat Genet 11:382–388Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 King TR, Christianson GJ, Mitchell MJ, Bishop CE, Scott D, Ehrmann I, Simpson E, Eicher EM, Roopenian DC (1994) Deletion mapping by immunoselection against the H-Y histocompatibility antigen further resolves theSxr a region of the mouse Y chromosome and reveals complexity of theHya locus. Genomics 24:159–168Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Knebelmann B, Boussin L, Guerrier D, Legeai L, Kahn A, Josso N, Picard J-Y (1991) Anti-Müllerian hormone Bruxelles: a nonsense mutation associated with the persistent Müllerian duct syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:3767–3771CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Koehler MR, Neuhaus D, Engel W, Schartl M, Schmid M (1995) Evidence for an unusual ZW/ZW'/ZZ sex-chromosome system in Scardinius erythrophthalmus (Pisces, Cyprinidae), as detected by cytogenetic and H-Y antigen analyses. Cytogenet Cell Genet 71:356–362CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Koopman P, Gubbay J, Vivian N, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge R (1991) Male development of chromosomally female mice transgenic forSry. Nature 351:117–121Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 McLaren A (1983) Sex reversal in the mouse. Differentiation 23[Suppl]:S93-S98PubMed
  Google Scholar
 McLaren A, Simpson E, Tomonari K, Chandler P, Hogg H (1984) Male sexual differentiation in mice lacking H-Y antigen. Nature 312:552–555Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Mitchell MJ, Bishop CE (1992) A structural analysis of the Sxr region of the mouse Y chromosome. Genomics 12:26–34Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Müller U (1981) Immunological and functional aspects of H-Y antigen. Hum Genet 58:29–33PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Müller U, Urban E (1981) Reaggregation of rat gonadal cells in vitro: experiments on the function of H-Y antigen. Cytogenet Cell Genet 31:104–107PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Müller U, Aschmoneit I, Zenzes MT, Wolf U (1978) Binding studies of H-Y antigen in rat tissues. Indications for a gonad-specific receptor. Hum Genet 43:151–157Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Müller U, Wolf U, Siebers JW, Günther E (1979a) Evidence for a gonad-specific receptor for H-Y antigen: binding of exogenous H-Y antigen to gonadal cells is independent of β2-microglobulin. Cell 17:331–335Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Müller U, Zenzes MT, Wolf U, Engel W, Weniger JP (1979b) Appearance of H-W (H-Y) antigen in the gonads of oestradiol sex-reversed male chicken embryos. Nature 280:142–144Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Müller U, Wachtel SS, Jaswaney VL, Goldberg EH (1993) H-Y (SDM) antibody specifically binds Müllerian inhibiting substance. Hum Genet 91:515–518Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Nakamura D, Wachtel SS, Kallman K (1984) H-Y antigen and the evolution of heterogamety. J Hered 75:353–358CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Picard J-Y, Guerrier D, Kahn A, Josso N (1989) Molecular biology of anti-Müllerian hormone. In: Wachtel SS (ed) Evolutionary mechanisms in sex determination. CRC, Boca Raton, pp 209–217Google Scholar
 Reinboth R, Mayerova A, Ebensperger C, Wolf U (1987) The occurrence of serological H-Y antigen (Sxs antigen) in the diandric protogynous wrasseCoris julis (L) (Labridae, Teleostei). Differentiation 34:13–17CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Roopenian DC (1992) What are minor histocompatibility loci? A new look at an old question. Immunol Today 13:7–10Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Scott DM, Dyson PJ, Simpson E (1992) A new approach to the cloning of genes encoding T-cell epitopes. Immunogenetics 36:86–94Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Scott DM, Ehrmann IE, Ellis PS, Bishop CE, Agulnik AI, Simpson E, Mitchell MJ (1995) Identification of a mouse male-specific transplantation antigen, H-Y. Nature 376:695–698Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Silvers WK, Gasser DL, Eicher EM (1982) H-Y antigen, serologically detectable male antigen and sex determination. Cell 28:439–440Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Simpson E, Chandler P, Goulmy C, Disteche CM, Ferguson-Smith MA, Page DC (1987) Separation of the genetic loci for the HY antigen and for testis determination on human Y chromosome. Nature 326:876–878Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Takahashi M, Hayashi M, Manganaro TF, Donahoe PK (1986) The ontogeny of Müllerian inhibiting substance in granulosa cells of the bovine ovarian follicle. Biol Reprod 35:447–453Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Vigier B, Picard J-Y, Tran D, Legeai L, Josso N (1984a) Production of anti-Müllerian hormone: another homology between Sertoli and granulosa cells. Endocrinology 114:1315–1320CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Vigier B, Tran D, Legeai L, Bézard J, Josso N (1984b) Origin of anti-Müllerian hormone in bovine freemartin fetuses. J Reprod Fertil 70:473–479CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Vigier B, Watrin F, Magre S, Tran D, Josso N (1987) Purified bovine AMH induces a characteristic freemartin effect in fetal rat prospective ovaries exposed to it in vitro. Development 100:43–55CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Vigier B, Forest MG, Eychenne B, Bezard J, Garrigou O, Robel P, Josso N (1989) Anti-Müllerian hormone produces endocrine sex reversal of fetal ovaries. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:3684–3688CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wachtel SS (1983) H-Y antigen and the biology of sex determination. Grune and Stratton, New YorkGoogle Scholar
 Wachtel SS, Koo GC, Boyse EA (1975) Evolutionary conservation of H-Y (“male”) antigen. Nature 254:270–272Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wachtel SS, Koo GC, Breg WR, Thaler HT, Dillard GM, Rosenthal IM, Dosik H, Gerald PS, Saenger P, New M, Lieber E, Miller OJ (1976) Serologic detection of a Y-linked gene in XX males and XX true hermaphrodites. N Engl J Med 295:750–754CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wachtel SS, Bresler PA, Koide SS (1980a) Does H-Y antigen induce the heterogametic ovary? Cell 20:859–864Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wachtel SS, Hall JL, Müller U, Chaganti RSK (1980b) Serumborne H-Y antigen in the fetal bovine freemartin. Cell 21:917–926Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wang W, Meadows LR, Haan JMM den, Sherman NE, Chen Y, Blokland E, Shabanowitz J, Agulnik AI, Hendrickson RC, Bishop CE, Hunt DF, Goulmy E, Engelhard VH (1995) Human H-Y: a male specific histocompatibility antigen derived from the SMCY protein. Science 269:1588–1590CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wolf U (1979) XY gonadal dysgenesis and the H-Y antigen. Hum Genet 47:269–277Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wolf U (1995) The molecular genetics of human sex determination. J Mol Med 73:325–331Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wolf U, Schempp W, Scherer G (1992) Molecular biology of the human Y chromosome. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 121:147–213CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zenzes MT, Müller U, Aschmoneit I, Wolf U (1978a) Studies on H-Y antigen in different cell fractions of the testis during pubescence. Immature germ cells are H-Y antigen negative. Hum Genet 45:297–303Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zenzes MT, Wolf U, Engel W (1978b) Organization in vitro of ovarian cells into testicular structures. Hum Genet 44:333–338Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Download referencesInstitut für Humangenetik, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Schlangenzahl 14, D-35392, Giessen, GermanyU. MüllerReprints and PermissionsMüller, U. H-Y antigens. Hum Genet 97, 701–704 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02346175Download citationReceived
15 January 1996Revised
22 January 1996Issue Date
June 1996DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02346175Instant access to the full article PDF.34,95 €Price includes VAT for Russian FederationImmediate online access to all issues from 2019. Subscription will auto renew annually.125,21 €This is the net price. Taxes to be calculated in checkout.Rent this article via DeepDyve.Learn more about Institutional subscriptionsAdvertisementOver 10 million scientific documents at your fingertipsNot logged in - 92.38.189.10Not affiliated© 2020 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature.AdvertisementMammalian Genome
 7, 
133–137(1996)Cite this article181 Accesses59 CitationsMetricsContrary to other genetic disorders, the genetic study of sex determination anomalies in humans stumbles over the difficulty in observing large pedigrees. In goats, abnormalities in sex determination are intimately linked to a dominant Mendelian gene coding for the “polled” (hornless) character, which could render this species an interesting animal model for the rare human cases of SRY-negative XX males. In this report, we describe genetic linkage between the polled/intersex synchome (PIS) and four microsatellite markers of the distal region of goat Chromosome 1 (CHI1), quite distinct from the bovine “polled” region. According to comparative mapping data, no sex-determining gene has been described so far in homologous regions in the human. This genetic localization constitutes a first step towards identifying a new autosomal sex-determining gene in mammals.Download to read the full article textAbbas, N.E., Toublanc, J.E., Boucekkine, C., Toublanc, M., Affara, N.A., Job, J.C., Fellous, M. (1990). A possible common origin of Y-negative human xx males and xx true hermaphrodites. Hum. Genet. 84, 356–360.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Allard, M.W., Miyamoto, M.M., Jarecki, L., Kraus, F., Tennant, M.R. (1992). DNA systematics and evolution of the artiodactyl family Bo-vidae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 3972–3975.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Arevalo, E., Holder, D.A., Derr, J.N., Bhebhe, E., Linn, R.A., Ruvuna, F., Davis, S.K., Taylor, J.F. (1994). Caprine microsatellite dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms at the SR-CRSP-1, SR-CRSP-2, SR-CRSP-3, SR-CRSP-4, SR-CRSP-5 loci. Anim. Genet. 25, 202.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Asdell, S.A. (1944). The genetic sex on intersexual goats and a probable linkage with the gene for hornlessness. Science 99, 124.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Bardoni, B., Zanaria, E., Guioli, G., Floridia, G., Worley, K.C., Tonini, G., Ferrante, E., Chiumello, G., McCabe, E.R.B., Fraccaro, M., Zuffardi, O., Camerino, G. (1994). A dosage sensitive locus at chromosome Xp21 is involved in male to female sex reversal. Nature Genet. 7, 497–501.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Barendse, W., Armitage, S.M., Kossarek, L.M., Shalom, A., Kirkpatrick, B.W., Ryan, A.M., Clayton, D., Li, L., Neibergs, H.L., Zhang, N., Grosse, W.M., Weiss, J., Creighton, P., McCarthy, F., Ron, M., Teale, Ai., Fries, R., McGraw, R.A., Moore, S.S., Georges, M., Soller, M., Womack, J.E., Hetzel, D.J.S. (1994). A genetic linkage map of the bovine genome. Nature Genet. 6, 227–234.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Basrur, P.K. (1969). Some thoughts about the association of polled trait and intersexuality in goats. Ann. Génét. Sél. Anim. 1, 439–446.Article
  Google Scholar
 Bennett, C.P., Docherty, Z., Robb, S.A., Ramani, P., Hawkins, J.R., Grant, D. (1993). Deletion 9p and sex reversal, J. Med. Genet. 30, 518–520.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Bhebhe, E., Kogi, J., Holder, D.A., Arevalo, E., Derr, J.N., Linn, R.A., Ruvuna, F., Davis, S.K., Taylor, J.F. (1994). Caprine microsatellite dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms at the SR-CRSP-6, SR-CRSP-7, SR-CRSP-8, SR-CRSP-9, SR-CRSP-10 loci. Anim. Genet. 25, 203.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Bishop, M.D., Kappes, S.M., Keele, J.W., Stone, R.T., Sunden, S.L.F., Hawkins, G.A., Solinas Toldo, S., Fries, R., Grosz, M.D., Yoo Jakyoung, Beattie, C.W. (1994). A genetic linkage map for cattle. Genetics 136, 619–639.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Callen, D.F., Thompson, A.D., Shen, Y., Phillips, H.A., Richards, R.I., Mulley, J.C., Sutherland, G.R. (1993). Incidence and origin of “null” alleles in the (AC)n microsatellite markers. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 52, 922–927.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Chaffaux, S., Cribiu, E.P. (1991). Clinical, histological and cytogenetic observations of nine intersex dogs. Genet. Sel. Evol. 23, 81s-84s.Article
  Google Scholar
 Cockett, N.E., Jackson, S.P., Shay, T.L., Nielsen, D., Moore, S.S., Steele, M.R., Barendse, W., Green, R.D., Georges, M. (1994). Chromosomal localization of the callipyge gene in sheep (Ovis aries) using bovine DNA markers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 3019–3023.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Cohen-Haguenauer, O., Picard, J.Y., Mattei, M.G. (1987). Mapping of the gene for anti-Mullerian hormone to the short arm of human chromosome 19. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 44, 2–6.CAS
  Google Scholar
 Crawford, A.M., Dodds, K.G., Pierson, C.A., Ede, A.J., Montgomery, G.W., Garmonsway, H.G., Beattie, A.E., Davies, K., Maddox, J.F., Kappes, S.W., Stone, R.T., Nguyen, T.C., Penty, J.M., Lord, E.A., Broom, J.E., Buitkamp, J., Schwenger, W., Epplen, J.T., Matthew, P., Matthews, M.E., Hulme, D.J., Beh, K.J., McGraw, R.A., Beattie, C.W. (1995). An autosomal genetic linkage map of the sheep genome. Genetics 140, 703–724.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 De la Chapelle, A. (1972). Analytic review: nature of origin of males with XX sex chromosomes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 24, 71–105.PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Dubin, R.A., Ostrer, H. (1994). SRY is a transcriptional activator. Mol. Endocrinol. 8, 1182–1192.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Foster, J., Dominguez-Steglich, M.A., Guioli, S., Kwok, C., Weller, P.A., Stevanovic, M., Weissenbach, J., Mansour, S., Young, I.D., Goodfellow, P.N., Brook, J.D., Schafer, A.J. (1994). Campomelic dysplasia and autosomal sex reversal caused by mutations in a SRY-related gene. Nature 372, 525–529.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Georges, M., Drinkwater, R., King, T., Mishra, A., Moore, S.S., Nielsen, D., Sargeant, L.S., Sorensen, A., Steele, M.R., Zhao, X., Womack, J.E., Hetzel, J. (1993). Microsatellite mapping of a gene affecting horn development in Bos taurus. Nature Genet. 4, 206–210.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Gerneke, W.H., Coubrough, R.I. (1970). Intersexuality in the horse. Onder-stepoort J. Vet Res. 37, 211–216.CAS
  Google Scholar
 Gibbons, R.J., Picketts, D.J., Villard, L., Higgs, D.R. (1995). Mutations in a putative global transcriptional regulator cause X-linked mental retardation with alpha-thalassemia (ATR-X syndrome). Cell 80, 837–845.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Green, P., Falls, K., Crooks, S. ({dy1989}). Documentation for CRI-MAP, version 2.4 St Louis,Hawkins, J.R. (1994). Sex determination. Hum. Mol. Genet. 3, 1463–1467.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 (1995). Chromosome painting with human chromosome specific DNA libraries reveals the extent and the distribution of conserved segments in bovine chromosomes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet., in press.Hulot, F., Basrur, P.K. (1969). La détermination du sexe chromosomique dans l’étude de l’intersexualité associée à l’absence de cornes chez la chèvre d’origine alpine. Ann. Génét. Sél. Anim. 1, 403–412.Article
  Google Scholar
 ISCNDA1989(1990). International System for Cytogenetics Nomenclature of Domestic Animals. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53, 65–79.Article
  Google Scholar
 Jeanpierre, M. (1987). A rapid method for purification of DNA from blood. Nucleic Acids Res. 15, 9611.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Koopman, P., Gubbay, J., Vivian, N., Goodfellow, P., Lovell-Badge, R. (1991). Male development of chromosomally female mice transgenic for Sry. Nature 351, 117–121.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Mannens, M., Slater, R.M., Heiting, C., Bliek, J., de Kraker, J., Coad, N., de Pagter-Holthuizen, P., Pearson, P.L. (1988). Molecular nature of genetic changes resulting in loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 11 in Wilm’s tumour. Hum. Genet. 81, 41–48.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 McElreavey, K., Vilain, E., Abbas, N., Costa, J.M., Souleyreau, N., Kucheria, K., Boucekkine, C., Thibaud, E., Brauner, R., Flamant, F. (1992). XY sex reversal associated with a deletion 5′to the SRY ‘HMG’ box in the testis determining region. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 11016–11020.Article
  Google Scholar
 McElreavey, K., Vilain, E., Abbas, N., Herskovitz, I., Fellous, M. (1993). A regulatory cascade hypothesis for mammalian sex determination: SRY represses a negative regulator of male development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 3368–3372.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 McFeely, R.A., Hare, W.C.D., Biggers, J.D. (1967). Chromosome studies in 14 cases of intersex domestic mammals. Cytogenetics 6, 242–253.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 McLaren, A. (1981). The fate of germ cells in the testis of fetal sex-reversed males. J. Reprod. Fertil. 61, 461–467.PubMed
  CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Moore, S.S., Sargeant, L.L., King, T.J., Mattick, J.S., Georges, M., Hetzel, D.J.S. (1991). The conservation of dinucleotide microsatellites among mammalian genomes allows the use of heterologous PCR primer pairs in closely related species. Genomics 10, 654–660.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Moore, S.S., Byrne, K., Berger, K.T., Barendse, W., McCarthy, F., Womack, J.E., Hetzel, D.J.S. (1994). Characterization of 65 bovine microsatellites. Mamm. Genome 5, 84–90.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 O’Brien, S.J., Womack, J.E., Lyons, L.A., Moore, K.J., Jenkins, N.A., Copeland, N.G. (1993). Anchored reference loci for comparative genome mapping in mammals. Nature Genet. 3, 103–112.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Pailhoux, E., Cribiu, E.P., Chaffaux, S., Darre, R., Fellous, M., Cotinot, C. (1994a). Molecular analysis of 60,XX pseudohermaphrodite polled goats for the presence of SRY and ZFY genes. J. Reprod. Fertil. 100, 491–496.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Pailhoux, E., Popescu, P.C., Parma, P., Boscher, J., Legault, C., Molteni, L., Fellous, M., Cotinot, C. (1994b). Genetic analysis of 38,XX males with genital ambiguities and true hermaphrodites in pigs. Anim. Genet. 25, 299–305.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Pépin, L., Amigues, Y., Lépingle, A., Berthier, J.-L., Bensaïd, A., Vaiman, D. (1995). Sequence conservation of microsatellites between cattle (Bos taurus) and goat (Capra hircus), and related species. Examples of use in parentage testing and phytogeny analysis. Heredity 74, 53–61.PubMed
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Randi, E., Fusco, G., Lorenzini, R., Toso, S., Tosi, G. (1991). Allozyme divergence and phylogenetic relationships among Capra, Ovis and Rupicapra (Artyodactyla, Bovidae). Heredity 67, 281–286.PubMed
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Ricordeau, G. (1969). Surprolificité des génotypes sans cornes dans les races caprines alpine saanen, alpine chamoisée et poitevine. Ann. Génét. Sél. Anim. 1, 391–395.Article
  Google Scholar
 Ricordeau, G. (1972). Distinction phénotypique des caprins homo et hétérozygotes sans cornes. Ann. Génét. Sél. Anim. 4, 469–475.Article
  Google Scholar
 Ricordeau, G., Lauvergne, J.-J. (1967). Hypothèse génétique unique pour expliquer la présence d’intersexués, de mâles en excès et de mâles stériles en race caprine saanen. Ann. Zootech. 16, 323–334.Article
  Google Scholar
 Soller, M., Angel, H. (1964). Polledness and abnormal sex ratios in saanen goats. J. Hered. 55, 139–142.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Soller, M., Laor, M., Barnea, R., Weiss, R., Ayalon, N. (1963). Polledness and infertility in male saanen goats. J. Hered. 54, 237–240.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Stevanovic, M., Zuffardi, O., Collignon, J., Lovell-Badge, R., Goodfellow, P. (1994). The cDNA sequence and chromosomal location of the human SOX2 gene. Mamm. Genome 5, 640–642.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Tommerup, N., Schempp, W., Meinecke, P., Pedersen, S., Bolund, L., Brandt, C., Goodpasture, C., Guldberg, P., Held, K.R., Reinwein, H., Saugstad, O.D., Scherer, G., Skjedal, O., Toder, R., Westvik, J., van der Hagen, C.B., Wolf, U. (1993). Assignment of an autosomal sex reversal locus (SRA1) and campomelic dysplasia (CMPD1) to 17q24.3–q25.1. Nature Genet. 4, 170–173.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Vaiman, D., Mercier, D., Moazami-Goudarzi, K., Eggen, A., Ciampolini, R., Lépingle, A., Velmala, R., Kaukinen, J., Varvio, S.-L., Martin, P., Levéziel, H., Guérin, G. (1994). A set of 99 cattle microsatellites: characterization, synteny mapping and polymophism. Mamm. Genome 5, 288–297.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Washburn, L.L., Eicher, E.M. (1983). Sex reversal in XY mice caused by a dominant mutation on chromosome 17. Nature 303, 338–340.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Wilkie, A.O.M., Campbell, F.M., Daubeney, P., Grant, D.B., Daniels, R.J., Mullarkey, M., Affara, N.A., Fitchett, M., Huson, S.M. (1993). Complete and partial XY sex reversal associated with terminal deletion 10q—report of 2 cases and literature review. Am. J. Med. Genet. 46, 597–600.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Download referencesDepartement de Génétique Animale, Laboratoire de Génétique biochimique et de Cytogénétique, Centre de Recherches de Jouy-en-Josas, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, 78352, Jouy-en-Josas, FranceD. Vaiman, A. Oustry & E. P. CribiuDepartment of Animal Production, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GR-540-06, Thessaloniki, GreeceO. KoutitaInstitut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Departement de Génétique Animale, Station d’Amélioration et de Génétique Animale, Centre de Recherches de Toulouse, 31326, Castanet Tolosan Cedex, FranceJ. -M. Elsen & E. ManfrediInstitut Pasteur, Laboratoire d’Immunogénétique Humaine, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.276, I25-28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724, Paris, Cedex 15, FranceM. FellousCorrespondence to D. Vaiman or O. Koutita or A. Oustry or J. -M. Elsen or E. Manfredi or M. Fellous or E. P. Cribiu.Reprints and PermissionsVaiman, D., Koutita, O., Oustry, A. et al. Genetic mapping of the autosomal region involved in XX sex-reversal and horn development in goats. Mammalian Genome 7, 133–137 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/s003359900033Download citationReceived
07 July 1995Accepted
06 September 1995Issue Date
February 1996DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/s003359900033Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeAdvertisementOver 10 million scientific documents at your fingertipsNot logged in - 92.38.189.10Not affiliated© 2020 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature.We use cookies to ensure the functionality of our website, to personalize content and advertising, to provide social media features, and to analyze our traffic. If you allow us to do so, we also inform our social media, advertising and analysis partners about your use of our website. You can decide for yourself which categories you want to deny or allow. Please note that based on your settings not all functionalities of the site are available. View our privacy policyMullerian inhibiting substance (MIS)/anti-Mullerian hormone is a differentiation factor that causes regression of the Mullerian duct in the developing male fetus and an apparent sex reversal of the fetal ovary when inappropriately exposed to it. The purified product is a 140-kilodalton glycoprotein composed of two identical subunits. We show that a C-terminal fragment of MIS, which shares homology with transforming growth factor-beta, causes regression of the Mullerian duct and inhibits the biosynthesis of aromatase in the fetal ovary. However, both activities are enhanced dramatically by addition of the N-terminal portion of MIS. Under conditions where potentiation occurs, the N- and C-terminal domains of MIS reassociate. These results indicate that the N-terminus of MIS, unlike that of the other members of the transforming growth factor-beta family, plays a role in maintaining the biological activity of the C-terminus.Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwideAdvanced SearchFormation of male-specific structures and regression of female primordia are regulated in early male embryogenesis by SRY, a single-copy gene on the Y chromosome. Assignment of SRY as the testis-determining factor in eutherian mammals is supported by molecular analysis of cytogenetic sex reversal (i.e., XX males and XY females) and by complementary studies of transgenic murine models. Here we characterize the putative DNA-binding domain of SRY, which contains a conserved sequence motif shared by high-mobility group nuclear proteins and a newly recognized class of transcription factors. The SRY DNA-binding domain specifically recognizes with nanomolar affinity proximal upstream elements (designated SRYe) in the promoters of the sex-specific genes encoding P450 aromatase and Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS). P450 aromatase catalyzes the conversion of testosterone to estradiol, and in the male embryo its expression is down-regulated. Conversely, MIS is expressed in the male embryo to induce testicular differentiation and regression of female reproductive ducts. SRYe-binding activity is observed in nuclear extracts obtained from embryonic urogenital ridge immediately preceding morphologic testicular differentiation. Our results support the hypothesis that SRY directly controls male development through sequence-specific regulation of target genes.SubmitFeedback    Privacy/LegalCopyright © 2020 National Academy of Sciences. Online ISSN 1091-6490We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us to set cookies.Author affiliationsThis appears to be the first reported case of a bull with a balanced autosomal reciprocal translocation associated with azoospermia. The analysis includes somatic chromosome banding, conventional meiotic analysis, and electron microscopy of synaptonemal complexes (SCs). The karyotype of the bull was found to be 60, XY, rcp(8;13)(ql l;q24). Electron microscopy of SCs in microspread pachytene spermatocytes revealed a high incidence of terminal asynapsis of the smallest arm of the quadrivalent. Most quadrivalents with such asynapsis and few with nonhomologous synapsis showed associations with the XY sex bivalent, leading to complete meiotic arrest at late pachynema. Except for one diakinetic cell, no diplotene and subsequent stages were encountered in air-dried meiotic preparations. The presence of degenerating primary spermatocytes in SC preparations, as well as in testicular sections, and the absence of spermatozoa in ejaculates confirm the chromosomally derived male sterility of the bull. X-chromosome reactivation, evidenced by the cytomorphological reversal of associated sex bivalents, appeared to be the initial step in the degeneration of spermatocytes. Consequently, the formation of a separate, fully developed XY body, which was previously demonstrated on the periphery of spermatocyte nuclei in fertile bulls, could not be attained in this case. Extensive end-to-end association of autosomal bivalents in meiotically arrested, as well as degenerating, spermatocytes was a consistent and unique observation of this study. Such associations may lead to enhanced reactivation of the X chromosome.© 1993 S. Karger AG, BaselAccepted: February 27, 1992
Published online: May 14, 2008
Issue release date: 1993Number of Print Pages: 7
Number of Figures: 0
Number of Tables: 0ISSN: 1424-8581 (Print)
eISSN: 1424-859X (Online)For additional information: https://www.karger.com/CGR1993, Vol.62, No. 2-31993PREV Article NEXTPrivacy Policy | Terms of Use | ImprintKarger International: COM | DE | CN© 2020 S. Karger AG, BaselAuthor affiliationsThis appears to be the first reported case of a bull with a balanced autosomal reciprocal translocation associated with azoospermia. The analysis includes somatic chromosome banding, conventional meiotic analysis, and electron microscopy of synaptonemal complexes (SCs). The karyotype of the bull was found to be 60, XY, rcp(8;13)(ql l;q24). Electron microscopy of SCs in microspread pachytene spermatocytes revealed a high incidence of terminal asynapsis of the smallest arm of the quadrivalent. Most quadrivalents with such asynapsis and few with nonhomologous synapsis showed associations with the XY sex bivalent, leading to complete meiotic arrest at late pachynema. Except for one diakinetic cell, no diplotene and subsequent stages were encountered in air-dried meiotic preparations. The presence of degenerating primary spermatocytes in SC preparations, as well as in testicular sections, and the absence of spermatozoa in ejaculates confirm the chromosomally derived male sterility of the bull. X-chromosome reactivation, evidenced by the cytomorphological reversal of associated sex bivalents, appeared to be the initial step in the degeneration of spermatocytes. Consequently, the formation of a separate, fully developed XY body, which was previously demonstrated on the periphery of spermatocyte nuclei in fertile bulls, could not be attained in this case. Extensive end-to-end association of autosomal bivalents in meiotically arrested, as well as degenerating, spermatocytes was a consistent and unique observation of this study. Such associations may lead to enhanced reactivation of the X chromosome.© 1993 S. Karger AG, BaselAccepted: February 27, 1992
Published online: May 14, 2008
Issue release date: 1993Number of Print Pages: 7
Number of Figures: 0
Number of Tables: 0ISSN: 1424-8581 (Print)
eISSN: 1424-859X (Online)For additional information: https://www.karger.com/CGR1993, Vol.62, No. 2-31993PREV Article NEXTPrivacy Policy | Terms of Use | ImprintKarger International: COM | DE | CN© 2020 S. Karger AG, BaselData on 202 calves born, 191 calves weaned and 182 calves at 30 mo of age produced in 1969 from the Boran and Red Poll breeds and their reciprocal crosses were analyzed to estimate heterosis, additive maternal effects and additive direct effects on survival and growth traits from birth to 30 mo of age. The calves were produced in the Ankole District of southwestern Uganda as a part of a beef cattle research program designed to provide information to support a commercial ranching development scheme in an area that had been cleared of the tsetse fly. Breed of sire effects were significant for birth and weaning weight, and breed of dam effects were significant for birth, weaning and 12-mo weight. Breed of sire and breed of dam effects that were significant showed the Boran breed to have higher values for all traits except breed of dam effects on birth weight; calves with Red Poll dams were 3.6 kg heavier (P<.01) at birth than calves with Boran dams. Steers were significantly heavier than heifers at all ages except birth. Young cows (3 and 4 yr old) and old cows (9 yr old and older) produced calves that weighed significantly less at weaning, 12 mo and 18 mo than calves with dams that were 5 through 8 yr old. Heterosis effects were significant for weights at weaning, 12, 18, 24 and 30 mo of age; generally, heterosis effects on weight increased with age. Heterosis effects approached significance for survival from birth to 30 mo. Additive maternal effects were significant for birth weight; crossbred calves with Boran dams weighed 6.0 kg less at birth than crossbred calves with Red Poll dams. There was a reversal of the reciprocal effect between prenatal and postnatal gains; crossbred calves with Boran dams weighed 7.1 kg more atweaning than crossbred calves with Red Poll dams. Examination of additive direct effects showed the Boran breed to be significantly heavier than the Red Poll breed for birth weight and weaning weight. Additive direct effects showed the Boran breed to have generally higher (P>.05) values than the Red Poll breed for most other traits analyzed. Differences between straightbreds of the Boran and Red Poll breeds, which reflect differences in additive maternal and additive direct effects combined, significantly favored the Boran breed for weaning weight and 18-mo weight and favored (P>.05) the Boran breed for all other traits except birth weight. It was concluded that the Red Poll breed had higher values for additive maternal effects for birth weight than the Boran breed in the climatic and nutritive environment in which this experiment was conducted; for most other traits evaluated, the Boran breed generally had higher values for additive maternal and higher values for additive direct effects than the Red Poll breed.Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide