Male-to-female sex reversal in horses is a developmental disorder in which phenotypic females have a male genetic constitution. Male-to-female sex reversal is the second most common genetic sex abnormality, after X chromosome monosomy. All male-to-female sex reversal cases studied to date have been found to be infertile. Therefore, a screening test is particularly useful in laboratories doing DNA genotyping in horses. Our laboratory has tested > 209,000 horses for parentage using a panel of microsatellite markers and the sex marker gene amelogenin (AMEL). Suspect XY sex reversal cases are reported females with a male profile by AMEL testing. After routine genotyping, 49 cases were detected and further tested using the sex-determining region Y (SRY) gene, confirming the XY SRY-negative genotype of suspect sex reversal cases. When some inconsistencies arose in the initial result, a molecular panel of X- and Y-linked markers was analyzed for these samples. Of the 49 cases, 33 were confirmed as XY SRY-negative. The remaining 16 cases were identified as false-positives as a result of anomalies of AMEL testing in horses.24 hours online access to download contentResearch off-campus without worrying about access issues. Find out about Lean Library hereWorking off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsX monosomy is the most common disorder of sex development in horses. Although cytogenetic analysis is still the gold standard in the diagnosis of equine X monosomy, novel molecular techniques are being sought to quickly and reliably detect this chromosome abnormality.The goal of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of a novel variant of the PCR technique—namely, droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)—in the detection of X monosomy in mares.A proof of concept of the usefulness of ddPCR in diagnosing an abnormal number of X chromosomes in mares.We examined an infertile mare using cytogenetic (fluorescent in situ hybridisation—FISH) and molecular (droplet digital PCR—ddPCR) techniques. The X chromosome copy number in ddPCR was estimated via detection of the AMELX gene copy number. In addition, 70 mares homozygous for X‐linked microsatellite marker (LEX3) were examined by ddPCR. For all mares, a PCR search for the Y‐linked SRY gene was also performed.Cytogenetic analysis and ddPCR gave concordant results, indicating pure X monosomy in the studied mare. Of the 70 additional mares examined by ddPCR, a single copy of the X chromosome was found in two cases. All mares were SRY‐negative and thus both freemartinism, manifested by leucocyte XX/XY chimerism, and sex reversal syndrome (XX, SRY‐positive) could be excluded.The ddPCR approach does not allow for unequivocal identification of mosaicism (63,X/64,XX or 65,XXX/64,XX), but may give an indication that further cytogenetic analysis is necessary.The ddPCR approach appeared to be useful for diagnosing nonmosaic X monosomy in mares. If the number of X chromosome copies in a mare, as determined by ddPCR, differs from two (in our study, <1.8 or >2.2), additional cytogenetic investigation is recommended with the aim of detecting the mosaicism.Volume52, Issue4July 2020Pages 627-631© 2019 EVJ LtdContact UsMulberry House,
31 Market Street, Fordham,
Ely, Cambridgeshire,
CB7 5LQ
Email: info@beva.org.ukSex-bias in gene expression is a widespread mechanism for controlling the development of phenotypes that differ between males and females. Most studies on sex-bias in gene expression have focused on species that exhibit traditional sex-roles (male-male competition and female parental care). By contrast the Syngnathid fishes (sea horses, pipefish, and sea dragons) are a group of organisms where many species exhibit male brooding and sex-role reversal (female-female competition for mates and paternal parental care), and little is known about how patterns of sex-bias in gene expression vary in species with sex-role reversal. Here we utilize RNA-seq technology to investigate patterns of sex-bias in gene expression in the brain tissue of the Gulf Pipefish (Syngnathus scovelli) a species that exhibits sex-role reversal. Gene expression analysis identified 73 sex-biased genes, 26 genes upregulated in females and 47 genes upregulated in males. Gene ontology analysis found 52 terms enriched for the sex-biased genes in a wide range of pathways suggesting that multiple functions and processes differ between the sexes. We focused on two areas of interest: sex steroids/hormones and circadian rhythms, both of which exhibited sex-bias in gene expression, and are known to influence sexual development in other species. Lastly, the work presented herein contributes to a growing body of genome data available for the Syngnathids, increasing our knowledge on patterns of gene expression in these unusual fishes.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.Working off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsChromosomal abnormalities in the sex chromosome pair (ECAX and ECAY) are widely associated with reproductive problems in horses. However, a large proportion of these abnormalities remains undiagnosed due to the lack of an affordable diagnostic tool that allows for avoiding karyotyping tests. Hereby, we developed an STR (single‐tandem‐repeat)‐based molecular method to determine the presence of the main sex chromosomal abnormalities in horses in a fast, cheap and reliable way. The frequency of five ECAX‐linked (LEX026, LEX003, TKY38, TKY270 and UCDEQ502) and two ECAY‐linked (EcaYH12 and SRY) markers was characterized in 261 Purebred Spanish Horses to determine the efficiency of the methodology developed to be used as a chromosomal diagnostic tool. All the microsatellites analyzed were highly polymorphic, with a sizeable number of alleles (polymorphic information content > 0.5). Based on this variability, the methodology showed 100% sensitivity and 99.82% specificity to detect the most important sex chromosomal abnormalities reported in horses (chimerism, Turner's syndrome and sex reversal syndromes). The method was also validated with 100% efficiency in 10 individuals previously diagnosed as chromosomally aberrant. This STR screening panel is an efficient and reliable molecular–cytogenetic tool for the early detection of sex chromosomal abnormalities in equines that could be included in breeding programs to save money, effort and time of veterinary practitioners and breeders.Volume48, Issue4August 2017Pages 412-419© 2017 Stichting International Foundation for Animal GeneticsOPEN ACCESSPEER-REVIEWEDRESEARCH ARTICLESex determining region Y-box 9 (SOX9) is an important regulator of sex and skeletal development and is expressed in a variety of embryonal and adult tissues. Loss or gain of function resulting from mutations within the coding region or chromosomal aberrations of the SOX9 locus lead to a plethora of detrimental phenotypes in humans and animals. One of these phenotypes is the so-called male-to-female or female-to-male sex-reversal which has been observed in several mammals including pig, dog, cat, goat, horse, and deer. In 38,XX sex-reversal French Large White pigs, a genome-wide association study suggested SOX9 as the causal gene, although no functional mutations were identified in affected animals. However, besides others an 18bp indel had been detected in the 5′-untranslated region of the SOX9 gene by comparing affected animals and controls. We have identified the same indel (Δ18) between position +247bp and +266bp downstream the transcription start site of the porcine SOX9 gene in four other pig breeds; i.e., German Large White, Laiwu Black, Bamei, and Erhualian. These animals have been genotyped in an attempt to identify candidate genes for porcine inguinal and/or scrotal hernia. Because the 18bp segment in the wild type 5′-UTR harbours a highly conserved cAMP-response element (CRE) half-site, we analysed its role in SOX9 expression in vitro. Competition and immunodepletion electromobility shift assays demonstrate that the CRE half-site is specifically recognized by CREB. Both binding of CREB to the wild type as well as the absence of the CRE half-site in Δ18 reduced expression efficiency in HEK293T, PK–15, and ATDC5 cells significantly. Transfection experiments of wild type and Δ18 SOX9 promoter luciferase constructs show a significant reduction of RNA and protein levels depending on the presence or absence of the 18bp segment. Hence, the data presented here demonstrate that the 18bp indel in the porcine SOX9 5′-UTR is of functional importance and may therefore indeed be a causative variation in SOX9 associated traits.Citation: Brenig B, Duan Y, Xing Y, Ding N, Huang L, Schütz E (2015) Porcine SOX9 Gene Expression Is Influenced by an 18bp Indel in the 5’-Untranslated Region. PLoS ONE 10(10): e0139583. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583Editor: Christoph Englert, Leibniz Institute for Age Research - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), GERMANYReceived: July 10, 2015; Accepted: September 15, 2015; Published: October 2, 2015Copyright: © 2015 Brenig et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are creditedData Availability: All relevant data are within the paper.Funding: The authors have no support or funding to report.Competing interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.Sry (sex determining region Y)-box 9 (SOX9) belongs to the SoxE subgroup of Sox family proteins and is expressed during embryonal development and adult life in meso-, ecto- and endoderm derived tissues [1]. It is involved in numerous cellular processes, e.g. chrondrogenesis [2], sex determination [3], pigmentation [4], organ maintenance [1], limb development [5], and cancer [6]. In the mesoderm SOX9 is involved in chondrogenesis and skeletal development [7], male gonad development, as well as development of cardiac valves and septa as well as epithelial differentiation in the pyloric sphincter [8]. However, SOX9 does not only play an important role in embryonal development. Recent data demonstrate that it is also important in the maintenance of adult organs and expression of SOX9 can be detected in adult stem and progenitor cells [9]. In mice it was shown that SOX5, SOX9, and SOX13 are expressed in adult Leydig cells and may therefore contribute to steroido- and spermatogenesis in postnatal testes [10]. In rats SOX9 expression was detected in the adult testicular cords and seminiferous tubuli suggesting a role in further germ cell differentiation [11]. SOX9 expression was also detected in goat testis in postnatal development, however, expression levels decreased to less than 50% of the concentration measured at two months of age [12].Despite high levels of expression in both chondrogenic tissue and gonads, SOX9 is also transcribed to varying degrees in other tissues, including human adolescent heart, brain, kidney, muscle, colon, and cranial neural crest [13]. This suggests that SOX9 has other crucial functions not only in chondrogenesis and sex determination. For example, SOX9 supports tumor growth and invasion, regulates CEACAM1 expression in colon epithelium and plays a role in cranial neural crest development [14, 15].Because of its wide range of interactions and functions, it is not surprising that mutations of the SOX9 gene locus are causative for a variety of defects in humans including campomelic dysplasia with or without sex reversal [16, 17], Pierre Robin sequence [18], Cooks syndrome [19], 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis [20], 46,XX male sex reversal, and congenital generalized hypertrichosis with or without hyperplasia [21]. Male-to-female or female-to-male sex reversal has also been described in animals [22–26]. In a Sry-negative XX European roe deer three SOX9 copies were detected leading to an incomplete male-determination. The sex reversal was presumably due to a dosage effect. In earlier studies of canine XX sex reversal SOX9 was initially excluded as candidate gene, however, recent reports show a SOX9 duplication resulting in an overexpression [25, 27]. In pigs female-to-male sex reversal of 38,XX animals has been described in several studies and it was shown that SOX9 expression is elevated in XX sex-reversed or intersex gonads [23, 24]. Recently, a genome-wide association study performed in the French Large White population demonstrated that the only significantly associated SNPs clustered around the SOX9 locus [28]. Comparative sequencing of the candidate region in affected animals and controls revealed 14 different polymorphisms. Unfortunately, all of these were located outside of the exons or splice-sites and therefore were questioned as functional candidate mutations [28]. However, at least three haplotypes were deduced that were more frequently present in the affected animals. These haplotypes included polymorphisms located in important regulatory regions as well as the 5′- and 3′-UTR of SOX9. One of the regulatory regions is the so-called TES (testis specific enhancer) approx. 13 kb upstream the transcription start site. It was shown in mice that within this region a highly conserved core element TESCO is bound by different transcription factors resulting in either up or down regulation of SOX9 [3, 29]. But SOX9 expression regulation is complex and under the control of further distant located elements. For example, eight (E1–E8) evolutionary conserved elements have been identified by comparative analysis. Five of these elements are dispersed in a region 290 kbp upstream and three up to 452 kbp downstream of SOX9. Two further elements were localized in the 3′-UTR of SOX9 [30]. In recent experiments using chromosome conformation capture-on-chip analysis even more distant regulatory regions influencing SOX9 expression have been identified [31]. These regions are located 2.46 Mb upstream as well as 1.22 Mb and 1.6 Mb downstream of SOX9. SOX9 also regulates its own expression in a positive feedback mechanism by the so-called SOM, an enhancer identified in mice 70 kb upstream of Sox9 [32]. In this respect it is noteworthy that a potential SOX9 consensus binding site [33] can be found approx. 17.8 kb upstream the porcine SOX9 transcription start site. Besides the long-range regulation, SOX9 expression is, of course, also regulated by promoter elements. In the murine Sox9 promoter an interval between -193 and -73 was identified to be essential for maximal promoter activity and tissue-specific expression in mouse cell lines [34]. Subsequently, several studies reported that functional elements in this region, i.e. two functional CCAAT boxes, a cAMP-response element (CRE) half-site and two specificity protein 1 (SP1) binding sites within 150 bp upstream the transcription start site (TSS), regulated SOX9 transcription in mouse and human chondrogenic cell lines and primary chondrocytes [35, 36]. In humans it was shown that SOX9 expression is regulated by Sp1, CREB, and CBF [37, 38]. These binding sites are located in the proximal promoter upstream the transcription start site. In vitro mutagenesis of these sites results in a reduction of SOX9 promoter activity. To define the regulatory network in response to different hormones and cellular signals, it is important to characterize the cis-regulatory elements even in the minimal promoter region. Functional elements located between -256 and +67 are important for controlling human SOX9 transcription efficiency [35]. However, transcription elements in the interval between -73 and +251 determine the minimal transcriptional activity of the mouse Sox9 promoter [34]. Whether additional regulatory elements are influencing SOX9 transcription downstream the transcription start site has not been shown so far.In this context, it is noteworthy that in the French Large White population mentioned above, an 18bp indel was detected in the 5′-UTR in three of the sequenced control animals [28]. In this contribution we report that the same 18bp indel is also present in other pig breeds, i.e. German Large White, Laiwu Black, Bamei, and Erhualian. The occurrence of the 18bp indel in such diverse pig breeds in conjunction with the results reported about the porcine 38,XX sex reversal phenotype prompted us to address the question whether this region has an influence on SOX9 expression and might therefore at least partly explain the sex reversal. This hypothesis is further supported by the fact that the 18bp indel region harbours a CRE half-site which is usually recognized by the cAMP-response element binding protein CREB [39].Seven Chinese domestic pig breeds (Erhualian, Laiwu Black, Bamei, Wuzhishan, Hang, Jianhexiang White, Tibetan) and different Western commercial pig breeds (Pietrian, German Landrace, German Large White, Red Duroc) were investigated. Blood samples were drawn by veterinarians as part of routine diagnostic procedures (parentage control, epidemiological testing) with informed owner consent, therefore the study was exempt of ethical approval according to the German regulations. A total of 938 animals were used for the identification of polymorphisms in the SOX9 gene. The complete SOX9 gene including 2 kb up- and downstream sequences was analysed.PFLP analysis was used to screen all samples using the following PCR primers: forward 5'-GCCAGTTTTACCCCCAGGA–3' and reverse 5'-AGCGGCTCCCGGGAA GCCT–3'. The amplicon has a length of 189bp and 207bp for the Δ18 and wild type alleles, respectively. PCR was performed in a final 20 μL reaction mix contained 40 ng DNA, 1 × PCR buffer, 2.0 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 10% DMSO, 10 μmol of each primer and 1 unit of ExTaq DNA polymerase (Takara). The PCR profile was as follows: 3 min at 94°C; 35 cycles of 30 s at 94°C and 1 min at 68°C; and a final extension of 7 min at 72°C. PCR products were evaluated by electrophoresis on 2% agarose gels.The cell lines used for the experiments were selected based on their reported transfection efficiencies and level of SOX9 expression. Nuclear extract from ESK–4 cells (female embryonal porcine kidney) were used for the immunodepletion EMSA in order to keep within the autologous porcine system. In addition it was shown previously that SOX9 is expressed in the embryonal kidney and therefore the presence of essential regulatory factors was assumed [40]. No data on SOX9 expression in PK–15 are available. Expression of SOX9 has been shown in ATDC5 [41]. In HEK293T SOX9 was not detectable using antibody NBP1-85551 (Novus Biologicals). However, due to a lower transfection efficiency of porcine epithelial PK–15 and mouse pre-chondrogenic ATDC5 cell lines, we also used human kidney HEK293T, which is known to have a higher transfection efficiency [41–44].HEK293T, PK–15, and ATDC5 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 2 mM glutamine at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Porcine kidney ESK–4 cells were purchased from the European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC) and cultured according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocols.DNA-binding affinity was analysed as described [45] using three oligonucleotides containing either the CRE half-site (WT: 5′-CGCTGCAGCCGAGTGACGCGCCAG GCTTCC–3′), a mutated CRE half-sitemut (MT: 5′-CGCTGCAGCCGAGCTCTACGC CAGGCTTCC–3′) or the consensus CRE binding site (CRE: 5′-AGAGGATTGCCT GACGTCAGAGAGCTAG–3′). HEK293T cells were transfected using HA-tag CREB-expression plasmid (pcDNA4-HA-CREB, see below) and nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were prepared after 32 h. Extracts were incubated with the biotinylated probes (WT, MUT, CRE) and Streptavidin MagneSphere Paramagnetic particles (Promega) for 2 h at room temperature. The reactions were separated using a MagneSphere Magnetic Separation Stand (Promega) and washed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted extracts were separated on SDS/PAGE and analysed by Western blotting using a phospho-CREB antibody (Millipore).Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were prepared from sub-confluent ESK–4 cells by NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Kit (PIERCE) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA-protein interaction was studied by EMSA following the instructions of Chemiluminescent Nucleic Acid Detection Module (PIERCE) with minor modifications as previously described [46]. Briefly, binding reactions included 2 μL 10 x binding buffer (100 mM Tris, 500 mM KCl, 10 mM DTT; pH 7.5), 5% BSA, 0.5 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol, 1 mM MgCl2, 100 ng poly-dAdT, 0.1% NP–40 and 4–4.5 μg nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. Binding reactions were pre-incubated for 20 min on ice followed by 20 min at room temperature after adding 20 fmol biotin-end labelled double strand oligonucleotide probe (wild type: 5′-gcgccttcctaaaagctcgccgcTGCAGCCGAGTGACGCGCcaggcttcccgggagcc–3′; Δ18: gcgccttcctaaaagctcgccgccaggcttcccgggagcc–3′). Finally, the mixtures were loaded onto 7% acrylamide–0.5x Tris-borate-EDTA gel (acrylamide/bisacrylamide = 37.5:1). For competition analysis, 2–5 pmol unlabelled competitors, i.e. the 18-bp fragment, were added to the binding reactions. For interrogation of the binding transcription factor, 3 μL phospho-CREB antibody (Millipore) or E2F4 antibody (Millipore) was pre-incubated with nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins on ice for 2 h to get the maximal signal. The mix was added to the above binding reactions for 20 min on ice prior to the addition of the labelled DNA probe.To analyse the effect on expression of CREB binding to the wild type 5′-UTR pcDNA4-HA-CREB, pGL4.20-WT (wild type) and pGL4.20-Δ18 (mutant) were constructed. Full-length human CREB cDNA (Sino Biological Inc.) was subcloned into the pcDNA4-HA expression vector. pGL4.20-WT and pGL4.20-Δ18 was generated by subcloning the porcine SOX9 promoter between position -100 and +399 (TSS = +1) into the KpnI/HindIII sites of the pGL4.20 vector. The promoter was obtained by artificial gene synthesis (Sangon).To determine the effect of Δ18 on translation, two plasmids (psiCHECK-2-WT-TTG and psiCHECK-2-Δ18-TTG) were constructed by inserting the 5’-UTR plus the start codon of SOX9 into an NheI site upstream the Renilla luciferase gene. Before inserting the DNA fragments into the psiCHECK–2 vector, the start codon of the Renilla luciferase was mutated to TTG by PCR-driven overlap extension. By this way, the Renilla luciferase translation would be driven by the start codon of SOX9. The 5'-UTR of SOX9 was PCR amplified using the primers: forward 5'-TTTTGCTAG CAAGAGCCCCTGGGCTGGGAGTTGG–3' and reverse 5'-TTTTGCTAGCATCAC GCAGGCCCGGGGCAGGGGAC–3'. Amplified products were cloned and ligated into the NheI site directly preceding the Renilla luciferase gene in the plasmid psiCHECK-2-TTG. The psiCHECK2-TTG vectors are ideal for examining the effect of 5’-UTRs on gene expression as described [47, 48]. By fusing the 5’-UTR of interest to the TTG mutated Renilla luciferase gene, luciferase activity can be used as a marker for 5’-UTR regulation.Cells were seeded at 2 x 105 cells per well in 24-well dishes. When the cells were 80% confluent, the luciferase constructs were transfected using LipofectamineTM 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Thirty-six hours after transfection, cells were harvested and assayed for luciferase activity using a dual-luciferase reporter assay kit (Promega) following the manufacturer’s manual. Results are given as relative light units (RLU) that is Firefly luciferase value/Renilla luciferase value. The average RLU of cells co-transfected with pGL4.20 and pRL-TK (Renilla luciferase control vector, Promega) was considered to be 1. In each experiment 0.2 μg of pGL4.20, pGL4.20-WT, or pGL4.20-Δ18 was added together with 50 ng pRL-TK without or with 0.8 μg pcDNA4-HA-CREB. The optimal amount and ratio of reporter and control plasmids have been determined in preliminary experiments. The amount of pRL-TK was adjusted according to previous reports [49–51].Student's t-test was used to calculate significance (* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001). All experiments were performed in triplicate.Total RNA was extracted with the TRIZOL Reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 6 μg of RNA was transcribed into first-strand cDNA using Superscript First-Strand Synthesis System for RT-qPCR (Takara). The relative expression levels were analysed using Brilliant II FAST SYBR QPCR Master Mix (Stratagene) in an MX3000P system (ABgene) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The following primers were used: Renilla 1, 5′-CTGATCTGATCGGAA TGGGT–3′ and 5′-GACGATGGCCTTGATCTTGT–3′; ß-actin 1, 5′-AAGGAGAAG CTGTGCTACGTCG–3′ and 5′-TGAAGGTAGTTTCGTGGATGCC–3′.Putative transcription factor binding sites within Δ18 were analysed with MatInspector (http://www.genomatrix.de/matinspector) using default settings. The DNA sequence between the transcription start site and the start codon was used as input. The promoter alignment analysis of evolutionary relationship among pig and other vertebrates was performed using ClustalW2 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/). Expression data were analysed using GraphPad PrismTM 5.0 for Macs (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).All transfection experiments were performed in at least three independent experiments using three biological replicates and standard errors (SEM) were calculated using Microsoft Excel for Mac 2011 (version 14.5.4).In an analysis of 938 animals of different commercial and Chinese pig breeds 12 polymorphisms (SNP) were identified within in the 5′-UTR (2/12), introns (5/12), and 3′-UTR (5/12) of SOX9 (Table 1). In addition an 18bp indel (Δ18) abolishing an interval between +247bp and +266bp downstream the TSS in four of the analysed pig breeds, i.e. German Large White, Laiwu Black, Bamei, and Erhualian, was identified (Table 2). As mentioned above we previously studied Δ18 in 545 animals of the commercial breeds in an attempt to identify an association with inguinal and scrotal hernia. However, no significant association could be detected using transmission disequilibrium test (p = 0.075) [52, 53]. All SNPs including Δ18 have been already deposited either with dbSNP or described previously as mentioned in the introduction [28].https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.t001https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.t002DNA sequence comparison between pig, cattle, buffalo, roe deer, and horse, demonstrates that the Δ18 region is highly conserved (Fig 1) and harbours three potential transcription factor binding sites with varying degrees of similarity to the respective consensus motives (Table 3). Due to the highly conserved sites and potential transcription factor binding sites, we hypothesized that this region might be important for SOX9 expression. To test CREB binding to the 18bp region in vivo, HEK293T cells were transfected with the CREB-expression plasmid (pcDNA4A-HA-CREB) and nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were incubated with oligonucleotides harbouring the 18bp region (WT) and a CRE consensus sequence (CRE). As control an oligonucleotide homologous to the 18bp region with a mutated CRE half-site (MUT) was used. As shown in Fig 2A CREB binds to the WT and CRE oligonucleotides, whereas no binding was detected to the mutated control oligonucleotide. Specificity of CREB binding was analysed with competition and immunodepletion EMSAs. Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were prepared from ESK–4 cells and incubated with the labelled wild type DNA fragment (Fig 2B). As shown in Fig 2B, a specific band (BP) was detectable and diminished with increasing concentrations of cold unlabelled double strand homologous competitor. To exclude other factors which could bind to this region, we used antibodies directed against another potential transcription factor listed in Table 3, i.e. E2F, pre-incubated the cell extracts with the antibodies and then performed an immunodepletion EMSA as described elsewhere [54]. With the interference analysis we expected that due to binding of the antibody less transcription factor would be available to bind the labelled oligonucleotide and therefore would result in a reduced band intensity. Two antibodies were used, directed against CREB and E2F4. Fig 2C shows that when a polyclonal CREB antibody (anti-phospho-CREB) was added to the binding reaction the intensity of the protein-DNA complex was significantly reduced (lane 2) whereas an anti-E2F4 antibody did not influence the band intensity (lane 3). No binding was detected with the Δ18 fragment (lane 4). The band intensities were densitometrically quantified and differed significantly between lane 2 and 3 (Fig 2C lower panel).The 18bp sequence and the CRE half-site are indicated. The sequence alignment in the lower panel shows conserved regions between pig, cattle, buffalo, roe deer, and horse. (B) Sequence alignment of the wild type and 18bp indel (Δ18) region.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.g001(A) Biotinylated oligonucleotides WT, MUT, and CRE were incubated with cell extracts of HEK293T cells transfected with a CREB expression plasmid. Bound protein was purified using Streptavidin MagneSphere Paramagnetic particles and a MagneSphere Magnetic Separation Stand (Promega), separated on an SDS/PAGE and Western blotted. Western blots were incubated with an HA-CREB antibody. Intensities of bands were densitometrically measured using ImageJ software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/index.html). (B) A constant amount of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins of ESK–4 cells and labelled probe (WT) were incubated with increasing amounts of homologous unlabelled competitor. DsFP, double stranded free probe; ssFP: single stranded free probe; BP, bound protein-DNA complexes. (C) Immunodepletion assays were performed using anti-phospho-CREB and anti-E2F4 antibodies. Density of the resulting bands was determined using ImageJ software.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.g002https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.t003To analyse whether CREB binding and the Δ18 variant in the context of the 5'-UTR have regulatory effects on SOX9 expression the wild type and the Δ18 5′-UTR were cloned into the pGL4.20 vector and used for transfection of HEK293T cells with or without a CREB expression plasmid. As shown in Fig 3 (left panel, -CREB) the wild type 5′-UTR resulted in a significantly higher activity than the Δ18 fragment in the absence of CREB. When CREB was co-expressed (Fig 3 right panel, +CREB) the activity of the wild type 5´-UTR was reduced to the level of the Δ18 fragment and both fragments resulted in a significant lower expression than the CREB induced expression of the control vector.HEK293T cells were transiently co-transfected with pGL4.20-WT, pGL4.20-Δ18 with or without pcDNA4A-HA-CREB over-expression vector. Relative luciferase activity was measured after 32 h using dual luciferase reporter assays. The results are given as relative light units (RLU). The average RLU of cells co-transfected with pGL4.20, pRL Renilla luciferase control reporter vector, and pcDNA4A-HA was considered to be 1 (error bars indicate standard deviations).https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.g003Three expression vectors were constructed, i.e. psiCHECK-2-TTG, -WT-TTG and Δ18-TTG and transfected into HEK293T, PK–15, and ATDC5 cells. As shown in Fig 4A the Renilla luciferase start codon was mutated to TTG (psiCHECK-2-TTG) to abolish translation from this site. As the 5'-UTR of porcine SOX9 with a length of 394 bp does not contain multiple open reading frames or other upstream AUGs except the natural start codon, we cloned the two different variants of the SOX9 5'-UTR into the NheI cloning site of the psiCHECK-2-TTG vector to generate psiCHECK-2-WT-TTG and psiCHECK-2-Δ18-TTG. In these constructs translation will be initiated from the original SOX9 start codon -12 bp upstream with the addition of 4 amino acids at the N-terminus of the Renilla luciferase. Although the N-terminus of the luciferase is important for the stability of the enzyme [55], it has been shown that the addition of amino acids, e.g. Myc epitope or His-tag, does not influence the activity [56, 57].(A) Schematic diagram showing the luciferase plasmids used for translation efficiency analysis. The start codon of Renilla was mutated to TTG. Two plasmids (psiCHECK-2-WT-TTG and –Δ18-TTG) were constructed by inserting the 5’-UTR plus the start code of SOX9 into upstream of the mutated Renilla luciferase gene. By this way, the Renilla luciferase expression would be driven by the primary initiation codon of SOX9. (B) The deletion decreases the translation efficiency of porcine SOX9. The four different plasmids were transfected into HEK293T, PK–15 and ATDC5 cells. After 24 h, both Firefly and Renilla luciferase values were measured. The ratio of Renilla and Firefly luciferase value were used as RLU. The average RLU for psiCHECK-2-TTG was considered to be 1.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.g004In all three transfected cell types the luciferase activity was almost reduced to background levels compared to the intact expression vector demonstrating the effect of the mutated Renilla start codon (Fig 4B). Renilla luciferase activity of psiCHECK-2-TTG was then used to assess the effect of the 5’-UTR on translation. Both constructs harbouring the wild type (WT) or Δ18 were used for transfection of HEK293T, PK–15, and ATDC5 cells. In all three cells types, the Δ18 showed a significant lower luciferase activity compared to the wild type 5′-UTR construct. In addition, Renilla transcripts were analysed by qRT-PCR. As shown in Fig 5 the wild type 5′-UTR resulted in a 3-fold higher RNA concentration compared to Δ18.RT-qPCR was performed for quantifying Renilla mRNA contents. The content of Renilla was normalized to ß-actin as internal control and the relative luciferase mRNA for psiCHECK-2-TTG was fixed as 1.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139583.g005In the present study we characterized the effects of an 18bp deletion within the 5’-UTR of porcine SOX9 on transcription and translation. A sequence comparison of the 18bp region between pig and other species showed several conserved nucleotide positions including a CRE half-site. To determine whether the CRE half-site was recognized by CREB, we performed affinity purification, competition and immunodepletion mobility shift assays and were able to show binding. CREB did functionally bind to the CRE half-site (CGTCA/TGACG), albeit with reduced binding affinity compared to the full palindrome (TGACGTCA) [58]. CREB seems to be an important transcription factor in the regulation of bone development by activating Sox9 in mouse. Overexpression of Creb enhanced the action of Sox9 in the PKA pathway in BMP-2-induced osteochondrogenic differentiation [59]. Potent dominant negative Creb transgenic mice showed short-limbed dwarfism along with a defect in chondrocyte proliferation and a delay in chondrocyte hypertrophy in endochondral bone formation [60]. Other sites could also interfere with the expression, for example, an additional conserved CRE half-site at position -147 in the human SOX9 promoter [37]. However, CREB binding in the porcine SOX9 gene 5′-UTR seems to down-regulate expression as shown in Fig 3. Interestingly, CREB co-expression clearly up-regulated the promoterless control vector pGL4.20. Although it has been reported that pRL-TK used as normalizer is up-regulated by different transcription factors, e.g. GATA transcription factors [49], 12S E1A [61], SP1 [51], Nurr1 [50], and dexamethasone [62], there are no data available that CREB influences pRL-TK expression per se. However, as it is known that the TK promoter is influenced by CREB binding [63], we also expected that pRL-TK will be up-regulated and therefore took this into account when normalizing the expression levels. Hence, the increased pGL4.20 expression in fact seems to be due to a CREB dependent induction. Although this was an unexpected and so far unknown effect of CREB on pGL4.20 expression, promotorless luciferase reporter vectors pGL3 and pGL4 have been reported to be at least responsive to steroid hormones [64].Inhibition of expression by CREB has been shown for other genes, e.g. MuSK, AP–2α, and PPAR-γ [65–67]. Truncations or mutations in UTRs often defeat fine regulation, cause impaired protein synthesis and finally associate with various diseases or disease susceptibility in humans [68]. Two studies showed that microRNA–145 directly repressed SOX9 expression by binding a unique site in the 3’-UTR resulting in a profound change in the human chondrocyte phenotype [69, 70]. It is also known that a stable secondary structure, multiple ORFs, and uAUGs in the 5’-UTR largely determine translation efficiency [71]. However, the 5’-UTR of the porcine SOX9 has only one ORF and hence the downregulation of SOX9 expression seems to be due only to either CREB binding or the presence of Δ18. CREB binding resulted in a reduction of SOX9 transcription as shown in Fig 3, whereas Δ18 could have an effect on either RNA stability or RNA degradation. A comparative in silico analysis of the secondary structure formation of the wild type and Δ18 5′-UTR showed that wild type RNA had a lower ΔG (-170.77) than Δ18 (-161.78) (data not shown).Although regulation of SOX9 expression is complex and the role of a single site must be interpreted with caution, our results are in agreement with the findings that the wild type 5′-UTR was identified more often in 38,XX sex-reversal pigs and SOX9 is over-expressed in XX intersex gonads [23, 28]. As shown in Figs 4 and 5 the presence of the 18bp region resulted in a significant increase of promoter activity compared to Δ18. Only, when CREB was overexpressed and bound to its binding site a reduction of expression was observed (Fig 3). From these findings different scenarios for the development of a 38,XX sex-reversal phenotype can be hypothesized. In the presence of the wild type genotype a sex reversal phenotype could result from a low CREB expression and a more stable SOX9 RNA secondary structure leading to high SOX9 concentrations and consequently to a male phenotype. On the other hand, if CREB expression is high enough to down-regulate SOX9 expression, no sex reversal will be induced. In the presence of the Δ18 genotype, where SOX9 expression was low independent of CREB and the RNA secondary structure was less stable, a normal sex development would be expected for 38,XX individuals.Hence, in further experiments it will be interesting to analyse the expression of CREB in controls and 38,XX sex-reversal gonads.We have shown that an 18bp deletion located +248 bp downstream the TSS in the 5’-UTR of the porcine SOX9 gene harbours a functional CRE half-site. The deletion segregates in several pig breeds. The 18bp region is essential for transcription and translation efficiency of porcine SOX9 and interacts with CREB. CREB binding to the wild type or presence of the 18bp deletion results in a significant reduction of SOX9 transcription and translation.The authors are thankful to Ch. Knorr for support and encouragement at the beginning of the project. S. Pach is thanked for expert technical assistance.Conceived and designed the experiments: BB YD YX ND. Performed the experiments: YD YX ND. Analyzed the data: BB YD YX ND ES. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: BB LH. Wrote the paper: BB YD ES.PLOS is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) corporation, #C2354500, based in San Francisco, California, USHorses are characterized as having a greater rate of chromosomal abnormalities than other species, which are mainly related to the sex chromosome pair and produce a series of different anomalies known as disorders in sexual development (DSD). In the present study, three Pura Raza Española (PRE) and one Menorquín (MEN) horses were studied and an incompatibility in their genetic and phenotypic sex were detected. Animals were karyotyped by conventional and molecular cytogenetic analyses and characterized using genomic techniques. Although all individuals, were totally unrelated, these animals had the same abnormality (64,XY SRY negative DSD) despite having an anatomically normal external mare phenotype. Therefore, this syndrome could remain undiagnosed in a large percentage of cases because the physiological and morphological symptoms are rare. In the present study, a slight gonadal dysgenesis was observed only in older individuals. Interestingly this chromosomal abnormality has been previously reported less than twenty times, and never in the PRE or MEN horses. With the present research, it is demonstrated that the use of genetic and cytogenetic diagnostic tools in veterinary practice could be an important complementary test to determine the origin of unexplained reproductive failures among horses.Present address: Instituto de Genética Animal (IGEVET), University of La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.Author affiliationsKeywords: Gonad developmentHermaphroditismMammalsOvaryOvotestisSex determinationSex reversalTestisGonads are the only organs with 2 possible developmental pathways, testis or ovary. A consequence of this unique feature is that mutations in genes controlling gonad development give rise not only to gonadal malformation or dysfunction but also to frequent cases of sex reversal, including XY females, XX males and intersexes. Most of our current knowledge on mammalian sex determination, the genetic process by which the gonadal primordia are committed to differentiate as either testes or ovaries, has derived mainly from the study of sex-reversed mice obtained by direct genetic manipulation. However, there are also numerous cases of natural exceptions to normal gonad development which have been described in a variety of mammals, including both domestic and wild species. Here, we review the most relevant cases of: (1) natural, non-induced sex reversal and intersexuality described in laboratory rodents, including Sxr and B6-YDOM mice; (2) sex reversal in domestic animals, including freemartinism in bovids and pigs, XX sex reversal in pigs, goats and dogs, XY sex reversal in the horse, and sex chromosome chimerism and sex reversal in the cat, and (3) sex reversal in wild mammals, including the generalised true hermaphroditism described in talpid moles, XY sex reversal in Akodon, Microtus and Dicrostonyx species, males lacking a Y chromosome and SRY in Ellobius lutescens, the X* chromosome of Myopus schisticolor, and sex chromosome mosaicism and X0 females in Microtus oregoni. These studies are necessary to elucidate particular aspects of mammalian gonad development in some instances and to understand how the genetic mechanisms controlling gonad development have evolved.© 2012 S. Karger AG, BaselPublished online: May 23, 2012
Issue release date: December 2012Number of Print Pages: 16
Number of Figures: 2
Number of Tables: 0ISSN: 1661-5425 (Print)
eISSN: 1661-5433 (Online)For additional information: https://www.karger.com/SXD2013, Vol.7, No. 1-3December 2012PREV Article NEXTPrivacy Policy | Terms of Use | ImprintKarger International: COM | DE | CN© 2020 S. Karger AG, BaselAuthor affiliationsKeywords: Arabian horseRSPO1Sex reversal syndromeSRYZFX/ZFYAn 18-month-old Arabian foal characterized by a stallion-like appearance was submitted for cytogenetic and molecular genetics examinations due to abnormalities of external genitalia and the presence of ovotestis-like structures in the abdominal cavity. By RB-banding the animal showed the normal female equine karyotype (2n = 64,XX). Molecular analysis revealed the absence of the SRY and ZFY genes and the presence of ZFX, a typical female equine condition. The entire RSPO1 coding region was examined to exclude its involvement. Although a SNP was found in exon 3, it was not responsible for an amino acid substitution.© 2011 S. Karger AG, BaselPublished online: October 22, 2011
Issue release date: February 2012Number of Print Pages: 4
Number of Figures: 3
Number of Tables: 1ISSN: 1661-5425 (Print)
eISSN: 1661-5433 (Online)For additional information: https://www.karger.com/SXD2012, Vol.6, No. 1-3February 2012PREV Article NEXTF.C. and S.A. contributed equally to this work.Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | ImprintKarger International: COM | DE | CN© 2020 S. Karger AG, BaselWorking off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsMale‐to‐female 64,XY sex reversal is a frequently reported chromosome abnormality in horses. Despite this, the molecular causes of the condition are as yet poorly understood. This is partially because only limited molecular information is available for the horse Y chromosome (ECAY). Here, we used the recently developed ECAY map and carried out the first comprehensive study of the Y chromosome in XY mares (n = 18). The integrity of the ECAY in XY females was studied by FISH and PCR using markers evenly distributed along the euchromatic region. The results showed that the XY sex reversal condition in horses has two molecularly distinct forms: (i) a Y‐linked form that is characterized by Y chromosome deletions and (ii) a non‐Y‐linked form where the Y chromosome of affected females is molecularly the same as in normal males. Further analysis of the Y‐linked form (13 cases) showed that the condition is molecularly heterogeneous: the smallest deletions spanned about 21 kb, while the largest involved the entire euchromatic region. Regardless of the size, all deletions included the SRY gene. We show that the deletions were likely caused by inter‐chromatid recombination events between repeated sequences in ECAY. Further, we hypothesize that the occurrence of SRY‐negative XY females in some species (horse, human) but not in others (pig, dog) is because of differences in the organization of the Y chromosome. Finally, in contrast to the Y‐linked SRY‐negative form of equine XY sex reversal, the molecular causes of SRY‐positive XY mares (5 cases) remain as yet undefined.Male‐to‐female sex reversal in horses is a developmental disorder in which phenotypic females or female‐like animals are genetically males with 64,XY karyotype. The condition has been found in several breeds (Kent et al. 1986, 1988b; Makinen et al. 1999; Bugno et al. 2003; Switonski et al. 2005), and after X chromosome monosomy, it is the most common sex chromosome abnormality in horses (Lear & Bailey 2008; Villagomez et al. 2009). The male‐to‐female sex reversal has been described in humans (known also as Swyer syndrome) (Michala et al. 2008), cattle, river buffalo, and sheep (Ferrer et al. 2009; Villagomez et al. 2009).Phenotypes of the XY sex reversal horses can vary in a broad range, from a very feminine to a greatly masculinized mare (Kent et al. 1988b). The majority of ‘feminine’‐type animals have normal female external and internal genitalia, and no somatic or behavioural abnormalities (Power 1986; Bowling et al. 1987). Primary cause of infertility of these mares is typically because of ovarian dysgenesis and underdeveloped uterus (Power 1986; Pailhoux et al. 1995; Makinen et al. 1999). The overall phenotype of the ‘feminine’‐type XY mares is very similar to those of 64,XO females (Bowling et al. 1987).Another less frequently observed phenotype shows various degrees of masculinization and virilization (Kent et al. 1986; Long 1988; Lear & Bailey 2008; Villagomez et al. 2009). The ‘masculine’‐type XY mares usually have abnormally developed genital tract, and the gonads can range from ovotestes to testicular feminization (Kent et al. 1986; Bowling et al. 1987; Kent et al. 1988a; Howden 2004; Villagomez et al. 2009), leading to male pseudohermaphrodites. All XY female horses studied so far have been found to be infertile, except one that gave birth to a normal 64,XX filly (Sharp et al. 1980).Most equine male‐to‐female sex reversal cases are sporadic, or have no supporting pedigree data. However, in some instances, familiar patterns of inheritance, particularly in certain Arabian sire lines, have been observed (Kieffer 1976; Kent et al. 1986; Bowling et al. 1987; Kent et al. 1988b).Despite the relatively frequent occurrence of XY mares among animals with chromosome abnormalities, the molecular causes of the condition are poorly understood. One of the reasons is the very limited knowledge about the molecular organization of the horse Y chromosome. The only molecular test, initiated in 1995 (Pailhoux et al. 1995), is PCR with the Y‐linked male sex‐determining gene SRY. According to this, two molecularly distinct types of XY females have been identified. The most prevalent are mares with no SRY gene (Pailhoux et al. 1995; Abe et al. 1999; Makinen et al. 1999; Bugno et al. 2003). Another type, represented by a single case, is an SRY‐positive mare (Switonski et al. 2005).In this study, we carried out the first comprehensive molecular analysis of the Y chromosome in XY sex‐reversed mares. This was performed by sequencing the bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones containing the SRY‐region (Raudsepp et al. 2004b; Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008b; Paria 2009) and developing markers that precisely defined the deletion in sex‐reversed individuals.The study involved 18 female horses from various breeds. The animals were referred in 2001–2009 to the Texas A&M Molecular Cytogenetic Laboratory because of infertility and/or abnormal genitalia (Table 1). The laboratory received peripheral blood samples from each individual in sodium heparin and EDTA Vacutainers (VACUTAINER™; Becton Dickinson).Cell cultures and chromosome preparations were made using standard cytogenetic methods as previously described (Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008a). For karyotyping, the slides were stained with Giemsa, the sex chromosomes were identified by C‐banding (Arrighi & Hsu 1971), and at least 20 cells were analysed for each technique.The approximate size of Y chromosome deletions in XY females were determined by FISH using selected BAC clones from the physical map of ECAY (Raudsepp et al. 2004b; Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008b) (Table 2). BAC DNA was isolated using the Plasmid Midi Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The BAC DNA was labelled and hybridized to metaphase chromosomes of XY females and control males following our standard FISH protocol (Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008a). The results were analysed with a Zeiss Axioplan2 fluorescent microscope equipped with Isis V5.2 (MetaSystems GmbH) software.Initial Y chromosome sequence information around the SRY gene was obtained by internal sequencing of two SRY‐containing BAC clones, viz., 140M23 and 24I23 (CHORI‐241 BAC library: http://bacpac.chori.org/quine241.htm). The first‐step sequencing primers were designed in SRY‐coding sequence and used for sequencing in both 3′ and 5′ directions. The newly obtained sequences served as templates to design primers for the next step. Such ‘walking’ was repeated several times. Sequencing reactions were carried out in 10 ‐μl volume with 1 μg of BAC DNA template and BigDye chemistry and resolved on an ABI‐3730 capillary sequencer.Next, the two SRY‐containing BAC clones, viz., 140M23 and 24I23, were completely sequenced at Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard (Cambridge, MA, USA) using Sanger sequencing technology. The draft sequence GenBank Accessions are AC214740 and AC215855, respectively. Additionally, a third SRY‐containing BAC clone, 107.3H9 from TAMU BAC library (http://hbz7.tamu.edu/homelinks/bac_est/bac.htm), was completely sequenced at Research and Testing Laboratory (Lubbock) following standard Roche 454‐sequencing protocols (Roche). A total of 260 150 sequences with an average length of 421 bp were derived and initially assembled using NGen (DNAstar). The contigs were aligned with SeqMan, resulting in a continuous 116 857 ‐bp sequence (GenBank HM103387). Sequences of the three BACs and all available STSs in the SRY‐region (Raudsepp et al. 2004b) were aligned using Sequencher 4.7 (Gene Codes) software and analysed using RepeatMasker (http://www.repeatmasker.org/), GENSCAN (http://genes.mit.edu/GENSCAN.html) and NCBI BLAST (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi).Finally, 1 185 bp of the single exon of SRY (Table 3), including the 684 ‐bp open reading frame, was sequenced from all SRY‐positive sex‐reversal females using BigDye chemistry. The sequences were aligned with the reference sequence (GenBank AB004572) using Sequencher 4.7 (Gene Codes) software.Initial analysis of the Y chromosome in XY mares was carried out by PCR using primers for the horse SRY gene and selected STS markers from ECAY maps (Raudsepp et al. 2004b; Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008b) (Table 3). Thereafter, additional STS primers were designed from masked (RepeatMasker: http://www.repeatmasker.org/) sequences of the three completely sequenced BAC clones. Androgen receptor (AR) from the X chromosome (Raudsepp et al. 2004a) was used as a positive control for all PCR amplifications. A summary of the PCR primers developed and used in this study is presented in Table 3. The same primers were used for sequencing the PCR products and/or for internal BAC sequencing in the SRY‐region.STS content analysis was carried out on the genomic DNA isolated from EDTA‐stabilized peripheral blood of the 18 XY females (Table 1). DNA from ‘Bravo’, the donor for CHORI‐241 BAC library, served as the male control. Similarly, DNA from ‘Twilight’, the donor for the genome sequence project (Wade et al., 2009), served as the female control. STS content analysis for each animal was carried out in 10 ‐μl volume duplicate PCR with 0.25 units Taq polymerase (JumpStart RedTaq, Sigma Aldrich), 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.4), 0.2 mM dATP, dCTP, dTTP and dGTP, 0.3 μM of each primer, and 50 ng of genomic DNA as template. The PCR products were resolved in 2% agarose gels containing ethidium bromide.Cytogenetic analysis of Giemsa‐stained metaphase spreads revealed that all 18 female horses (Table 1) had normal diploid chromosome number (2n = 64) with the XY sex chromosome complement, which is typical of males. This was confirmed by C‐banding, which clearly showed the presence of one X chromosome and one Y chromosome in all cells analysed (Fig. 1a–d). Animals 1 and 2 had extremely small Y chromosomes (Fig. 1c, d), compared to other XY females and male controls. In contrast, the Y chromosome in Animal 15 was larger than usual with a prominent and extended heterochromatic region (Fig. 1b).C‐banded metaphase spreads (a–b) and Giemsa‐stained karyotypes (c–d) of Animal 6 (a), Animal 15 (b), Animal 1 (c), and Animal 2 (d).The presence of the Y chromosome was further confirmed by FISH using microdissected horse Y chromosome (Raudsepp & Chowdhary 1999) as a probe (Fig. 2a–b). Hybridization results confirmed the cytogenetic observations that the Y chromosomes in Animals 1 and 2 were abnormally small (Fig. 2b). Moreover, FISH with 8 BAC clones evenly distributed along the ECAY contig map (Table. 2, Fig. 3a) showed that the two rudimentary Y chromosomes are molecularly different. The Y chromosome in Animal 1 gave FISH signals with all contig II–V and PAR BACs (Fig. 2c, d) and was negative only for contig I clones containing SRY and KDM5D (alias SMCY). In contrast, no FISH signals with any of the probes were observed in Animal 2, indicating that the rudimentary Y chromosome is comprised of little or no euchromatin (Fig. 3b). In the remaining 16 animals, FISH signals were observed with all MSY and PAR BACs, including the five overlapping clones in the SRY‐region (Table 2, Fig. 2e, f; Fig. 3c). Taken together, the cytogenetic and FISH analyses detected massive Y chromosome deletions over 10–15 Mb size (Raudsepp et al. 2004b) in two animals, whereas the gross organization of the Y chromosomes in all other XY mares appeared to be normal.Fluorescence in situ hybridization with microdissected Y chromosome painting probe (a–b), PAR gene GYG2 (c), MSY markers YE1 (green), and ZFY (red) (d), and BAC clones from SRY‐region 24I23 (green) and 107.3H9 (red) (e–f). Hybridizations were carried out on metaphase chromosomes of Animal 15 (a and f), Animal 1 (b–d) and Animal 9 (e) (see Table 1 for details).Schematic showing various ECAY deletions in XY females. (a). Composite map of ECAY showing the heterochromatic region, five BAC contigs (I–V) in the male‐specific region of Y (MSY), and the pseudoautosomal region (PAR). Markers that were used for FISH (bold and shaded grey) and PCR analysis are shown at the top of each region. Gene symbols are in italics. (b). Massive ECAY deletions (dark grey bars) in two XY females. (c). Contig of 5 overlapping BAC clones in the SRY‐region. Clones demarcated in bold were completely sequenced. (d). Detailed map of a 146 432 ‐bp region of MSY showing the size and marker content of the deletion, the two directed repeats (yellow and green arrows R1 and R2), and MSY (blue bars).Analysis by PCR with SRY primers divided the 18 XY females into two molecularly distinct groups: SRY negative (Animals 1–13, Table 1) and SRY positive (Animals 14–18). All XY mares were positive for the AR control gene. Next, we used a panel of 20 MSY and PAR markers (Fig. 3a) and studied by PCR their presence or absence in individual animals. As expected, all tested markers were negative in Animal 2, confirming the FISH results that the small Y chromosome is exclusively heterochromatic. In Animal 1, only markers from contigs II–V and the PAR were present. No amplification by PCR was observed with the 4 markers in contig I: YM2, KDM5D, SH3B14, and 26B21‐SP6 (Fig. 3a). Thus, the PCR and FISH results for Animal 1 were in complete agreement. Similarly, PCR analysis confirmed and refined FISH results for the remaining animals. All 20 ECAY markers were positive in Animals 3–18, showing that regardless of the presence or absence of SRY, the overall integrity of the Y chromosome was retained.Next, we investigated whether the deletion of SRY is the only molecular signature of the Y chromosome in the 11 SRY‐negative females (Animals 3–13). We hypothesized that if only the single exon of SRY (Hasegawa et al. 1999) is deleted, it should be possible to design a simple PCR test to distinguish between normal males and XY SRY‐negative females. We reasoned that if primers are designed to flank the deletion, distinctly different‐sized PCR products would be amplified from normal males and XY females. Such tests will show the size of deleted segments in sex‐reversed females and will be a useful alternative to the current presence‐ or absence‐based PCR analysis with SRY primers.To develop this test, we carried out a detailed STS content analysis with a panel of 34 markers in a 146 ‐kb region around SRY that was developed from three completely sequenced BAC clones (Fig. 3d). The analysis revealed that the deletion is not restricted to the SRY exon and includes at least 21 500 bp around it (Fig. 3d). We discovered that the deletion is flanked by approximately 28 kb of directed repeats (R1 and R2 arrows in Fig. 3d) that are present both in normal males and XY females. As the duplicated regions share a high degree of sequence similarity (approximately 96–100%), it was not possible to determine by PCR whether one or both segments are present in sex‐reversed animals. As shown in Fig. 3d, the unique MSY‐specific sequences (blue shades), which are suitable for primer design, are located tens of kilobase pairs away from the deletion. Thus, it was not possible to design primers for an alternative PCR test to distinguish between Y chromosomes in normal males and SRY‐negative females.Sequence analysis of the 146 432 ‐bp genomic segment around the deletion (Fig. 3d) identified three MSY genes –SRY, RBMY, and ATP6V0CY. The single‐copy SRY is part of the deletion, a multicopy gene RBMY (Paria 2009) is located in both directionally duplicated segments on either side of the deletion (Fig. 3d), and ATP6V0CY is a newly found Y‐linked gene in horses.Finally, FISH and STS content analyses did not detect any molecular differences between the Y chromosomes of SRY‐positive XY females and normal males. Likewise, sequences of the single exon of SRY in all 5 SRY‐positive females were 100% identical with each other and with the male reference sequence (data not shown). Therefore, the detailed analysis of the Y chromosome in XY females showed that the molecular causes of SRY‐positive male‐to‐female sex reversal in horses are not Y‐linked and remain as yet undefined.To our knowledge, this study represents the first comprehensive molecular characterization of the Y chromosome in XY sex‐reversed female horses. Using recently available molecular tools for MSY and the PAR (Raudsepp et al. 2004b; Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008b; Paria 2009), we considerably refined the underlying molecular aetiology of the SRY‐negative (Pailhoux et al. 1995; Abe et al. 1999; Makinen et al. 1999, 2001; Bugno et al. 2003) form of sex reversal in horses.A combination of cytogenetic, FISH, STS content, and sequence analysis revealed that the SRY‐negative form of sex reversal is a molecularly heterogenous condition. Deletions that lead to the loss of SRY can be massive, including megabase pairs of DNA (Fig. 3b), or limited to a region around SRY, removing tens of kilobase pairs of DNA (Fig. 3d). Notably, none of the deletions is restricted to the SRY sequence only. Furthermore, as illustrated by Animals 1 and 2 (Table 1), the massive deletions differ from each other both in size and content (Fig. 3b). The loss of entire ECAY euchromatin in Animal 2 makes this case genetically very similar to X monosomy. This is in agreement with the animal’s phenotype (Table 1) and supports earlier observations that mares with XY and XO sex chromosome complements are frequently indistinguishable by overall appearance (small stature), behaviour (abnormal oestrus behaviour), and gonadal phenotype (underdeveloped ovaries and uterus) (Chandley et al. 1975; Bowling et al. 1987; Long 1988). However, as none of the earlier cytogenetic studies report about finding an abnormally small Y chromosome, the molecular cause of the XO‐like phenotype in XY mares is probably not because of the massive loss of Y euchromatin. Female gonadal dysgenesis might rather be because of the absence of the second X chromosome.Systematic mapping of the horse Y chromosome and the development of Y‐linked markers started only recently (Raudsepp et al. 2004b). This is why all earlier molecular studies of XY mares have been limited to a few Y‐linked genes, viz., SRY (Pailhoux et al. 1995; Abe et al. 1999; Makinen et al. 1999, 2001; Bugno et al. 2003), AMELY, STS‐Y and ZFY (Makinen et al. 2001; Bugno et al. 2003). These tests confirmed the absence of SRY, and the presence of the three other markers, but had no knowledge about the relative order or map location of these genes. Therefore, the present study is the first in which the Y chromosomes of XY mares were analysed using detailed map information (Raudsepp et al. 2004b; Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008b) and partial sequence data for ECAY. This allowed fine demarcation of ECAY deletions (Fig. 3) and showed that all SRY‐negative mares, except Animals 1 and 2, share the same large 21.5 ‐kb deletion that includes SRY (Fig. 3d) but no other known functional MSY genes. The results are in agreement with the common idea that the female‐like phenotype or the lack of male phenotype in SRY‐negative mares is primarily because of the loss of SRY (Pailhoux et al. 1995; Makinen et al. 1999). However, the cause of female gonadal dysgenesis, another characteristic feature of both the XY and XO mares (Table 1), is not so clear. In females with X monosomy, haploinsufficiency for certain PAR genes has been considered as the cause of gonadal dysgenesis (Ellison et al. 1997; Blaschke & Rappold 2001). In this study, using SRY and a panel of 20 Y‐linked markers (Fig. 3a), we showed that, except for the SRY‐region, the rest of the Y chromosome is undisturbed. Thus, in contrast to XO females, the SRY‐negative XY mares have two normal copies of the PAR. Therefore, given that the molecular causes of gonadal dysgenesis in XY and XO females are the same, they are more likely associated with incomplete dosage of some non‐PAR Xp genes that escape X inactivation.Previously, it has been proposed that SRY‐negative sex‐reversal syndrome in horses is because of abnormal X‐Y recombination in male meiosis, resulting in the loss of SRY from the Y to the X chromosome (Abe et al. 1999; Makinen et al. 2001; Bugno et al. 2003). The assumption was based on observations in humans where such uneven crossovers are common and give rise to 46,XY SRY‐negative females and 46,XX SRY‐positive males (Rosser et al. 2009). However, it must be noted that the molecular organization of the human and horse Y chromosomes are very different. In humans, the SRY is located only 35 kb away from the pseudoautosomal boundary (PAB) (Skaletsky et al. 2003), which makes uneven X‐Y meiotic exchange feasible. In contrast, the horse SRY is located in the very proximal part of MSY (Raudsepp et al. 2004b), far from the PAB (Fig. 3a), and its involvement in abnormal meiotic exchange is unlikely (Raudsepp & Chowdhary 2008b).A more plausible explanation of Y deletions lies in the intrinsic nature of Y chromosome sequences. A typical feature of the haploid and non‐recombining Y chromosome is the presence of massive and numerous reversed (palindromic) and directional repeats (Skaletsky et al. 2003; Lange et al. 2009; Hughes et al. 2010). Sequence similarity between palindrome arms or repeated units might be as high as 99%–100%, facilitating inter‐and intra‐chromatid gene conversion and recombination (Lange et al. 2009). As such genetic exchanges help to maintain Y chromosome structural and functional integrity, the majority of important spermatogenesis genes are located in palindrome arms or directional repeats (Skaletsky et al. 2003; Lange et al. 2009). However, this mechanism also has a downside: inter‐chromatid recombination can frequently lead to duplications and deletions which, in humans, are associated with spermatogenic failure, sex reversal, and Turner syndrome (Lange et al. 2009). In this study, we show that in the horse Y chromosome, the SRY‐region is surrounded by two almost 100% identical directional repeats (Figs 3d & 4a). Not coincidentally, both repeated segments contain one copy of a known spermatogenesis‐related gene, RBMY (Elliott 2004). It is possible that the deletion of the SRY‐region, as seen in SRY‐negative XY mares, is the result of an inter‐chromatid recombination between the two repeats (Fig. 4b). Theoretically, this inter‐chromatid exchange should remove from the Y chromosome of XY females not only SRY but also one of the directed repeats (Fig. 4c). However, this can be proven only by direct Y chromosome sequencing, and not by PCR. If our assumption is correct, the SRY‐region is expected to become duplicated on another chromatid (Fig. 4c) and should be present in the Y chromosomes of paternal male full‐ or half‐sibs of the XY females. Possibly, duplication of SRY and triplication of repeats have no significant phenotypic effects, and the carriers remain undetected. Further, we infer that the molecular mechanism of the two massive deletions in Animals 1 and 2 might be quite similar to that presented in Fig. 4, with the only difference that recombination events have taken place between more distantly located repeats resulting in larger deletions.Schematic of the likely mechanism of SRY deletion in XY females (adopted from Lange et al. 2009). (a). Double‐stranded break (DSB) occurs in one of the directed repeats (R2) flanking SRY. (b). DSB is repaired by inter‐chromatid homologous recombination using R1 as a template to repair DSB in R2. (c). Homologous recombination between sister chromatids of ECAY deletes SRY and R2 from one chromatid and moves them to another.Taken together, the key factors causing SRY‐negative sex reversal are Y‐linked, although some X‐linked genes might also contribute to the phenotype. Thus, the primary mutation, sporadic or genetically predisposed, is derived paternally. Indeed, as shown in earlier studies, there are certain sire lines that produce more XY females than expected by chance (Kieffer 1976; Kent et al. 1986; Bowling et al. 1987; Kent et al. 1988b). However, the 13 SRY‐negative XY mares analysed in this study were from different breeds (Table 1) and families and were therefore not informative regarding the pedigree analysis.The SRY‐positive females are phenotypically distinct from the SRY‐negative mares, as shown by a single previous report (Switonski et al. 2005) and this study. These mares display features that are not typically observed in SRY‐negative animals, such as stallion‐like behaviour, large body size, abnormal external genitalia, elevated blood testosterone levels, and male rather than female gonadal dysgenesis (Table 1). Based on this, it is possible that many more SRY‐positive XY females have been described earlier, but because of the lack of molecular tools, they were not properly identified (Kieffer 1976; Kent et al. 1986, 1988a,b; Crabbe et al. 1992; Howden 2004). Therefore, the ‘masculine’‐type equine XY sex reversal might be more prevalent than the single previous report (Switonski et al. 2005) and the 5 cases described in this study.Detailed molecular analysis of the Y chromosome showed that the ‘feminine’ (SRY‐negative) and ‘masculine’ (SRY‐positive) XY sex reversals differed genetically more than just the absence or presence of SRY. While SRY‐negative animals showed various ECAY deletions, the Y chromosome of SRY‐positive mares was the same as in normal males; even the unusually large Y chromosome in Animal 15 was molecularly normal by PCR, FISH, and sequence analysis, and the abnormal size could be attributed to substantially enlarged heterochromatic region (Fig. 1b). We infer that the SRY‐positive condition is likely not Y‐linked. However, human studies suggest that a Y‐linked ‘growth’ gene might be responsible for the larger than usual body size (adult height) (Ogata & Matsuo 1992; McDonough 2003) of XY females. Further, it has been proposed that testicular feminization and male pseudohermaphroditism in SRY‐positive mares might be caused by a mutation in the X‐linked androgen receptor (AR) gene (Crabbe et al. 1992; Howden 2004; Switonski et al. 2005). To date, there is no experimental evidence to support this. It is also possible that, similarly to humans, the SRY‐positive sex reversal is a genetically heterogeneous disorder (Sarafoglou & Ostrer 2000). In humans, some cases are Y‐linked, showing different missense and frameshift mutations in the SRY‐coding region (Salehi et al. 2006; Shahid et al. 2008; Marchina et al. 2009). However, almost 80% of 46,XY women have no mutations in SRY or other Y‐linked genes, indicating the involvement of X‐linked or autosomal factors. The few different autosomal (Barbaro et al. 2009; Biason‐Lauber et al. 2009; Schimmer & White 2010) and X‐linked (Sarafoglou & Ostrer 2000) mutations described in XY women do not give consistent answers, and the underlying genetic causes of SRY‐positive sex reversal in humans and horses alike remain poorly understood.Male‐to‐female XY sex reversal, especially the SRY‐negative form, is a relatively frequent chromosomal abnormality in horses. Incidence of XY mares in our cytogenetic analysis practice is as high as 26% among all chromosomally abnormal animals studied during the period between 2001 and 2009. This is in line with earlier data showing that 12%–30% of cytogenetic abnormalities in horses count for XY females (Bowling et al. 1987; Power 1990). The condition has also been described in humans (Sarafoglou & Ostrer 2000; Michala et al. 2008), where about 10%–20% XY women are SRY negative, and 80–90% have normal SRY. Both SRY‐positive and SRY‐negative XY females have been found in cattle (Ferrer et al. 2009; Villagomez et al. 2009) and mouse (Arnold & Chen 2009). In contrast, surprisingly few and exclusively SRY‐positive ‘masculine’‐type XY females have been reported for other species, such as river buffalo (Di Meo et al. 2008), dog (Nowacka‐Woszuk et al. 2007; Whyte et al. 2009), and sheep (Ferrer et al. 2009). Notably, no XY sows have been found in pigs (Villagomez et al. 2009). This disparity might be because of uneven cytogenetic sampling of populations in different species. However, given the well‐organized cytogenetic screening system of domestic species, especially pigs, in France and many other European countries (Ducos et al. 2008), this is unlikely. Instead, we hypothesize that the prevalence of Y‐linked XY SRY‐negative condition is related to the diversity of the organization of the Y chromosome in different species (Skaletsky et al. 2003; Raudsepp et al. 2004b; Murphy et al. 2006; Hughes et al. 2010). For example, SRY is a single‐copy gene in human (Skaletsky et al. 2003), mouse (Lundrigan & Tucker 1997), and horse (Paria 2009). This implies that any Y chromosome rearrangement that causes the loss of SRY will result in an SRY‐negative condition. In contrast, species like cat (Pearks Wilkerson et al. 2008), rabbit (Geraldes & Ferrand 2006), rat (Turner et al. 2007), and several other rodents (Lundrigan & Tucker 1997) have multiple copies of SRY. Consequently, deletion of one SRY copy leaves other copies intact to carry out their function. Therefore, one plausible reason why species like pigs, dogs or sheep have no SRY‐negative XY females might be the presence of multicopy SRY. It could also be that SRY location in relation to inverted and directional repeats is different across species, thus facilitating SRY deletions in some species but not in others. It is anticipated that the ongoing mapping and sequencing projects for the mammalian Y chromosomes will soon provide better explanations for these ideas. Likewise, the availability of genome‐wide analysis tools, such as SNP‐chips and tiling arrays, are expected to improve the discovery of genes and rearrangements underlying the SRY‐positive form of sex reversal in horses and other species.This work was supported by USDA grant 2006‐04801 and CVMBS LINK Endowment for Equine Genomics. The University of Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station number for this paper is 10‐14‐077.The authors have declared no potential conflicts.Volume41, Issues2Special Issue: Horse Genomics and the Dorothy Russell Havemeyer FoundationDecember 2010Pages 41-52© 2010 The Authors, Journal compilation © 2010 Stichting International Foundation for Animal GeneticsA female American saddlebred horse was presented for surgical correction of a possible pseudohermaphrodite condition. The horse had abnormal external genitalia and exhibited stallion-like behaviour. No evidence of uterine or ovarian tissue was identified on laparoscopic examination, but hypoplastic testicular-like tissue was removed, although this was found to contain no spermatogonia upon histopathological examination. A karyotype was performed and showed the normal chromosomal complement for a female horse (64,XX). Polymerase chain reaction to detect the SRY gene was negative in peripheral blood as well as the testicular-like tissue. This case represents the first report of an SRY negative XX-male sex reversal intersex phenotype, which is a potentially inherited condition, in an American saddlebred horse.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.In mammals, the Y-linked SRY gene is normally responsible for testis induction, yet testis development can occur in the absence of Y-linked genes, including SRY. The canine model of SRY-negative XX sex reversal could lead to the discovery of novel genes in the mammalian sex determination pathway. The autosomal genes causing testis induction in this disorder in dogs, humans, pigs, and horses are presently unknown. In goats, a large deletion is responsible for sex reversal linked to the polled (hornless) phenotype. However, this region has been excluded as being causative of the canine disorder, as have WT1 and DMRT1 in more recent studies. The purpose of this study was to determine whether microsatellite marker alleles near or within five candidate genes (GATA4, FOG2, LHX1, SF1, SOX9) are associated with the affected phenotype in a pedigree of canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal. Primer sequences flanking nucleotide repeats were designed within genomic sequences of canine candidate gene homologues. Fluorescence-labeled polymorphic markers were used to screen a subset of the multigenerational pedigree, and marker alleles were determined by software. Our results indicate that the mutation causing canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal in this pedigree is unlikely to be located in regions containing these candidates.In mammals, the Y-linked SRY gene is normally responsible for testis induction, yet testis development can occur in the absence of SRY. Specifically, testes or ovotestes develop in XX human patients and domestic animals with SRY-negative XX sex reversal. Autosomal genes causing this disorder in the majority of human patients as well as dogs, pigs, and horses are presently unknown. Transgenic models of SRY-negative XX sex reversal have been produced by introducing mutations in known genes, but there is no naturally occurring mouse model.In the canine model, SRY-negative XX sex reversal segregates as an autosomal recessive trait with expression limited to 78,XX individuals that are homozygous for the sex reversal trait. Affected dogs have ovotestes (XX true hermaphrodites) or testes (XX males), a complete bicornuate uterus, and clitoral enlargement with bone formation characteristic of canine penile differentiation (Meyers-Wallen and Patterson 1988). With allowance for species differences in secondary sex characteristics, these phenotypes are strikingly similar to those observed in human patients. Furthermore, both XX true hermaphrodites and XX males occur within the same canine family, as has been reported in some human families (Sarafoglou and Ostrer 2000). Thus, the canine model of SRY-negative XX sex reversal could provide a novel gene in the mammalian sex determination pathway and increase our understanding of the mechanism of testis induction in the absence of SRY. Candidate genes for this disorder include autosomal genes known to have a role in the emergence of the bipotential gonad or those involved in testis or ovarian differentiation in humans, rodents, or other animal models (Table 1).Microsatellite marker locations of candidate genes for canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal. These autosomal genes are known to have a role in mammalian sex determination or differentiation. The chromosomal location of each marker was determined by in silico polymerase chain reaction using marker primers listed and canine genomic sequence deposited onlinehttp://www.genome.ucsc.edu.http://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov.In the polled intersex (PIS) goat model, SRY-negative XX sex reversal and absence of horns are caused by a large deletion that affects transcription of FOXL2 and PISRT1, which are located nearby. Mutations in FOXL2 have been found in patients with the blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome and/or premature ovarian failure but not in association with sex reversal. The region homologous to the PIS goat mutation has been excluded by marker analysis, indicating that mutations involving FOXL2 and PISRT1 are not responsible for the canine disorder (Kothapalli et al. 2003).Mutations in the Wilms' tumor gene cause renal and XY gonadal dysgenesis in humans (WAGR, Denys-Drash, and Frasier syndromes). WT1 encodes a zinc finger protein, and experimental evidence suggests that it upregulates SRY transcription by directly binding to DNA (Hossain and Saunders 2001). DMRT1, the double sex- and mab3-related transcription factor 1, encodes a protein with a zinc fingerlike DNA-binding motif (Pask et al. 2003; Raymond et al. 1999). DMRT1 is conserved among vertebrates, being involved in testis differentiation in mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish (Aoyama et al. 2003) and is associated with Sertoli cell maturation (Raymond et al. 2000). Deletions involving DMRT1 result in XY sex reversal in some animals. In humans, the minimal deletion in 9p24.3 that results in XY sex reversal removes both DMRT1 and DMRT2, but no significant mutations in either were found in a survey of sex-reversed patients (Raymond et al. 1999). Regions homologous to WT1 and DMRT1 have been excluded by marker analysis as candidates in the canine model (Kothapalli et al. 2004, in press).These genes have been attributed to the testis determination pathway in humans and mice. GATA4 encodes a transcription factor containing a zinc finger, and FOG2 is its cofactor. Both promote SRY expression in the XY gonad and are required for gonadal differentiation in mice (Tevosian et al. 2002). GATA4 is expressed in somatic cells of both XX and XY genital ridges and regulates testis DMRT1 expression (Lei and Heckert 2004).Lim homeobox 1, also known as LIM1, encodes a transcription factor with a DNA-binding domain. LHX1 is expressed at various times in several tissues involved in sexual development, including the intermediate mesoderm, mesonephros, fetal gonads, and the Mullerian and Wolffian ducts. Knock-in and knock-out experiments confirmed that LHX1 is essential to development of Mullerian ducts in females (Kobayashi et al. 2003). Although the majority of LHX1 null mice died, the few that survived to a stage sufficient for ascertainment developed normal testes or ovaries, but Mullerian ducts were absent in XX mice.Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1) has multiple roles in sex determination, including development of the pituitary, hypothalamus, and bipotential gonad and in transcriptional regulation of Mullerian-inhibiting substance and enzymes controlling steroid hormone synthesis. SF1 is also capable of regulating SRY transcription by transactivation of the promoter (Pilon et al. 2003). Both XX and XY mice with SF1 null mutations fail to develop gonads (Luo et al. 1994), as do human patients with similar mutations (Achermann et al. 1999).SRY-box containing gene 9 is an autosomal gene, which, like SRY, is a member of the high-mobility group, nonhistone proteins that associate with DNA. Transcriptional activation of SOX9 is critical to testis induction in all vertebrates, whether activated genetically (as in mammals) or environmentally (as in reptiles). In mammals it is likely that the function of SRY is to directly or indirectly upregulate SOX9. Initial SOX9 expression occurs in bipotential XX and XY gonads. After SRY is expressed, SOX9 is expressed only in XY gonads, becoming limited to pre-Sertoli cells (Moreno-Mendoza et al. 2003). Sertoli cell differentiation is critical to further testis organization and differentiation. SOX9 has the ability to induce the bipotential gonad to follow the testis determination pathway in the absence of SRY, as demonstrated in transgenic mice and human patients in which SOX9 overexpression results in testis differentiation in XX individuals (Bishop et al. 2000; Huang et al. 1999).The objective of this study was to determine whether microsatellite marker alleles within GATA4, FOG2, LHX1, SF1, and SOX9 are associated with the affected phenotype in a subset of the canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal pedigree.The multigenerational canine pedigree of SRY-negative XX sex reversal was founded upon one American cocker spaniel sire that was outcrossed to beagles to produce F1, F2, and F1 backcross offspring (Meyers-Wallen and Patterson 1988). Affected animals were identified by two criteria: the presence of testicular tissue in serial histologic sections of the gonads and the absence of SRY in genomic DNA (Meyers-Wallen et al. 1995). A subset of informative animals (n = 20) from the multigenerational pedigree was genotyped. These individuals included affected dogs (n = 10) and their direct ancestors back to the founding sire of the pedigree.Canine genes were identified previously or by query with human homologues to the 1.5× canine genome database (Kirkness et al. 2003) or the 7.6× canine genome sequence (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/guide/dog). To generate microsatellite markers, nucleotide repeats were identified within each canine gene. Flanking polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers (Table 1) were designed with Primer Select software (DNASTAR, Madison, WI). The forward primer of each pair was 5′-end labeled with a 6-FAM fluorescent tag (IDT, Coralville, IA).Amplification was performed from genomic DNA templates (50 ng) in a reaction volume of 30 μl containing 1μM of each primer, 0.25 mM dNTPs, 3 μl of 10× PCR buffer (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences, Foster City, CA), 1.5–3 mM MgCl2, and 1.5 U Taq Polymerase (Ampli Taq II, Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences).For SOX9 reactions, initial denaturation was 95°C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 30 sec, 70°C for 1 min, 72°C for 1 min, and final extension at 72°C for 2 min. For FOG2, LHX1, and SF1 reactions, the annealing step was 60°C, 64 °C, and 54 °C, respectively, for 1 min in 35 cycles. Touch down PCR was used for GATA4 reactions, wherein annealing was performed between 57°C and 60°C for 1 min in 35 cycles.A 1.5 μl portion of each amplified product was pooled with 0.5 μl of TAMRA standard (PRISM Genescan-500, Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) and 13 μl deionized formamide. Samples were denatured at 95°C for 5 min and analyzed on the ABI310 Genetic Analyzer with filter set C (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The size of reaction products relative to the internal TAMRA standard was determined by software (GENESCAN 2.1, Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences). All reaction products for each gene were run in the same assay and read relative to the same standard.All comparisons were made to human or canine sequences deposited at www.ensembl.org, www.genome.ucsc.edu, or www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.A pentanucleotide (caaaa) repeat in canine GATA4 was identified in the genomic sequence. This region maps to CFA25 (Table 1). Two alleles ranging from 314 to 319 bp and 3 different genotypes were found in the pedigree subset (Figure 1A). Genotypes in affected dogs were 1/1, 1/2, and 2/2. Seven affected dogs had genotypes that were different from those of the founding sire, and in four, neither allele was inherited from the founding sire.Pedigree subset (n = 20) of canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal genotyped with microsatellite markers. Genotypes at each marker locus are shown as numbers below the animal's symbol. The ? symbol indicates an unavailable sample. C1 is the American cocker spaniel that is the founding sire of the pedigree, and B1–B4 are beagles. All affected dogs inherit the sex-reversal trait from C1; thus, the disease-causing mutation should be identical by descent in all affected dogs. (A) Three different genotypes at the GATA4 microsatellite marker locus (CFA25) were present in affected dogs. (B) Five different genotypes at the FOG2 microsatellite marker locus (CFA13) were present in affected dogs. (C) Two different genotypes at the LHX1 microsatellite marker locus and four different genotypes at the SF1 microsatellite marker locus were present in affected dogs (CFA9). (D) Two different genotypes at the SOX9 microsatellite marker locus (CFA18) were present in affected dogs.A tetranucleotide (cttt) repeat in FOG2 was identified in the canine genome. This region maps to CFA13 (Table 1). Five alleles ranging from 315 to 363 bp and eight different genotypes were found in the pedigree subset (Figure 1B). Genotypes in affected dogs were 1/1, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5, and 2/5. Six affected dogs had genotypes at this locus that were different from those of the founding sire, and in two, neither allele was inherited from the founding sire. In those two, allele 5 can be traced to dog C3. Allele 5 (363 bp) in C3 is likely to be derived from the paternal allele because it differs by one repeat (4 bp) of the tetranucleotide (cttt) from allele 1 (359 bp). The simplest explanation for the occurrence of allele 5 in C3 is that a duplication of one repeat in the microsatellite region occurred in allele 1, which was transmitted by the sire. Allele 3 (335 bp) in C3 is likely to be inherited from the dam (B2) given that it is also present in other beagles, such as B3.A pentanucleotide (gtttt) repeat was identified in the canine genomic sequence of LHX1. This region maps to CFA9 (Table 1). Two alleles ranging from 289 to 294 bp and a total of two different genotypes at the LHX1 marker locus were identified in the pedigree (Figure 1C). Genotypes in affected dogs were 1/1 (n = 4) and 1/2 (n = 6). Six affected dogs had genotypes at this locus that were different from those of the founding sire. Due to the paucity of alleles at this locus, phase could not be determined with certainty for all affected dogs; however, four affected dogs (C9, C10, C18, C19) had at least one allele that was not inherited from the founding sire.A trinucleotide (agt) repeat was identified in the genomic sequence of canine SF1. This region maps to CFA9 (Table 1). Three alleles ranging from 466 to 475 bp and a total of five different genotypes at the SF1 marker locus were identified in the pedigree (Figure 1C). Genotypes in affected dogs were 1/1 (n = 1), 1/2 (n = 4), 2/3 (n = 3), and 3/3 (n = 2). Six affected dogs had genotypes at this locus that were different from those of the founding sire, and in two, neither allele was inherited from the founding sire.A trinucleotide (cca) repeat was identified in the genomic sequence of canine SOX9. This region maps to CFA18 (Table 1). Two alleles ranging from 340 to 343 bp and a total of two different genotypes at the SOX9 marker locus were identified in the pedigree (Figure 1D). Genotypes in affected dogs were 1/1 (n = 3) and 1/2 (n = 7). Three affected dogs had genotypes at this locus that were different from those of the founding sire. Due to the paucity of alleles at this locus, phase could not be determined with certainty for all affected dogs; however, two affected dogs (C18, C19) had at least one allele that was not inherited from the founding sire.Previous breeding studies have indicated that SRY-negative XX sex reversal in this pedigree segregates as an autosomal recessive trait with expression limited to 78,XX individuals that are homozygous for the sex reversal trait (Meyers-Wallen and Patterson 1988). Given that all affected dogs inherited this trait from C1, the founding sire of the pedigree (Figure 1), the disease-causing mutation should be identical by descent in all affected dogs. For each of the candidate gene markers noted here, the genotypes varied between affected dogs. Furthermore, assuming autosomal recessive inheritance of the sex reversal trait, one would expect that both alleles in affected dogs would be inherited from the founding sire of the pedigree. For each aforementioned candidate gene, a minimum of two affected dogs had at least one marker allele that was not inherited from the founding sire of the pedigree. These results indicate that it is unlikely that autosomal recessive mutations in or near GATA4, FOG2, LHX1, SF1, and SOX9 contain the causative mutation for SRY-negative XX sex reversal in this model.The goat model is the only model in which a causative mutation for naturally occurring SRY-negative XX sex reversal has been identified (Pailhoux et al. 2001). However, the region homologous to goat PIS has been excluded as a candidate for the canine disorder (Kothapalli et al. 2003). No human patients with SRY-negative XX sex reversal have been identified with mutations in the regions homologous to the PIS-deleted region or in WT1, DMRT1, GATA4, FOG2, LHX1, or SF1. Mutations causing overexpression of SOX9 in XX individuals have resulted in SRY-negative XX sex reversal in humans and mice; however, few human patients with such mutations have been reported. Taken together with results of the present study, this suggests that mutations responsible for this type of sex reversal in humans and other animals remain to be identified. Thus, the canine model could lead to the discovery of novel genes in the mammalian sex determination pathway. In addition to examining other candidate genes, we are analyzing results from a genome-wide screen of the multigenerational canine pedigree in order to identify the causative gene.Corresponding Editor: William MurphyThese studies were supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01 HD40351). This article was presented at the 2nd International Conference on the “Advances in Canine and Feline Genomics: Comparative Genome Anatomy and Genetic Disease,” Universiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, October 14–16, 2004.Achermann JC, Ito M, Ito M, Hindmarsh PC, and Jameson L,Aoyama S, Shibata K, Tokunaga S, Takase M, Matsui K, and Nakamura M,Bishop CE, Whitworth DJ, Qin Y, Agoulnik AI, Agoulnik IU, Harrison WR, Behringer RR, and Overbeek PA,Hossain A and Saunders GF,Huang B, Wang S, Ning Y, Lamb AN, and Bartley J,Kirkness EF, Bafna V, Halpern AL, Levy S, Remington K, Rusch DB, Delcher AL, Pop M, Wang W, Fraser CM, and Venter JC,Kobayashi A, Shawlot W, Kania A, and Behringer R,Kothapalli KSD, Kirkness E, Natale LJ, and Meyers-Wallen VN,Kothapalli K, Kirkness EF, Pujar S, and Meyers-Wallen VN,Kothapalli K, Kirkness EF, VanWormer R, and Meyers-Wallen VN, in press. Exclusion of DMRT1 as a candidate gene for canine SRY-negative XX sex reversal. Vet J.Lei N and Heckert LL,Luo X, Ikeda Y, and Parker KL,Meyers-Wallen VN, Palmer VL, Acland GM, and Hershfield B,Meyers-Wallen VN and Patterson DF,Moreno-Mendoza N, Harley V, and Merchant-Larios H,Pailhoux E, Vigier B, Chaffaux S, Servel N, Taourit S, Furet JP, Fellous M, Grosclaude F, Cribiu EP, Cotinot C, and Vaiman D,Pask AJ, Behringer RR, and Renfree MB,Pilon N, Daneau I, Paradis VN, Hamel F, Lussier JG, Viger RS, and Silversides DW,Raymond CS, Murphy MW, O'Sullivan MG, Bardwell VJ, and Zarkower D,Raymond CS, Parker ED, Kettlewell JR, Brown LG, Page DC, Kusz K, Jaruzelska J, Reinberg Y, Flejter WL, Bardwell VJ, Hirsch B, and Zarkower D,Sarafoglou K and Ostrer H,Tevosian SG, Albrecht KH, Crispino JD, Fujiwara Y, Eicher EM, and Orkin SH,Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwideWorking off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsA 5‐year‐old Thoroughbred mare was subjected to cytogenetic and molecular analysis because of infertility and masculine behaviour. Chromosome studies, including painting with the whole X chromosome specific probe, revealed a male chromosome complement (64,XY). The PCR amplification of the SRY and ZFY genes showed the presence of both those genes, while the endocrinological study demonstrated a high level of testosterone (9.7 nmol/l). Sequencing of the SRY gene (1121 bp), comprising also 5′‐ and 3′‐UTRs, did not reveal any differences when compared with the sequence of normal stallions. It was proposed that this mare represents the androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular feminization syndrome).Volume122, Issues1April 2005Pages 60-63A sex-reversal syndrome appears frequently in the horse. The mare carriers of this syndrome lack of SRY gene. It is suggested that sex-reversal syndrome is probably caused by transfer of the SRY gene from Y to the X chromosome, due to abnormal meiotic exchange. The aim of the study was molecular analysis of the Y-linked genes in a case of the sex-reversed infertile mare with 64,XY karyotype. The karyotype was established on the basis of analysis of 350 metaphase spreads stained by CBG banding. Molecular analysis of the loci assigned to the Y chromosome revealed absence of the SRY gene and presence of the other studied loci (ZFY, AMEL-Y and STS-Y). In this animal all fragments representing X chromosome (ZFX, AMEL-X and STS-X) were detected. External genitalia in the mare were normal, uterus was small and ovaries (examined by ultrasonography) extremely small. The mechanism of sex-reversal syndrome formation was discussed. It is postulated that during spermatogenesis in the sire two crossing-over events between the X and Y chromosomes occurred. One of them took place between the ZFY and SRY loci and another one between the SRY locus and the centromere.This work was conducted as part of NRIAP statutory activity, project no. 3203.1.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.A three year old pony with sexually ambiguous external genitalia was found to have a normal female karyotype (64, XX) and bilateral inguinal testes. The PCR analysis of blood samples revealed the absence of the Y chromosome sequences SRY, eTSPY and ZFY. No Y chromosome sequences were identified in DNA extracted from the gonads. The mechanism whereby XX sex reversal occurs in the absence of SRY is unknown.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.Working off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsVolume29, Issue5September 1997Pages 333-334Contact UsMulberry House,
31 Market Street, Fordham,
Ely, Cambridgeshire,
CB7 5LQ
Email: info@beva.org.ukAdvertisementJournal of Endocrinological Investigation
 11, 
609–613(1988)Cite this article7 Accesses10 CitationsMetricsThe XY Sex Reversal Syndrome of the horse is a condition associated with female or intersexual development in genetic males. In our previous study, 38 sex reversed XY mares were classified according to behavior, gross clinical phenotype, gonadal status, and H-Y phenotype. Four classes were described, ranging from potentially fertile female (Class I) to virilized intersex (Class IV). In the present study, serum testosterone concentrations were measured in 29 sex-reversed XY mares, 3 normal mares and 3 normal stallions. Serums were obtained during the breeding season (March-August), and were stored at − 70 C until assayed. Serum testosterone concentrations in the normal XX mares ranged from nondetectable to 0.41 ng/ml; in normal XY stallions, from 1.04 ng/ml to 2.4 ng/ml; and in XY mares, from nondetectable to 5.4 ng/ml. Sex reversed mares previously assigned to Class I or II had serum testosterone concentrations ranging from nondetectable to 0.22 ng/ml, whereas Class III and IV intersex mares had concentrations ranging from 0.43 to 5.4 ng/ml. Serum testosterone concentrations in XY mares were correlated with sex phenotype and behavior. Although the range of steroid concentrations among XY mares may be quantified more accurately with increased sampling, serum testosterone concentrations can be used currently as an added parameter for study of the sex reversed condition.This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.Kent M.G., Shoffner R.N., Bueon L., Weber A.F. XX sex reversal syndrome in the domestic horse. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 42: 8, 1986.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Kent M., Wachtel S. Development of the XY female: a comparative study. In: Wachtel S. (Ed.), Evolutionary mechanisms in sex determination. CRC Press, Boca Raton, in press.McDonnell S. Reproductive behavior of the stallion. Vet. Clin. Nort. Am.: Equine Practice 2: 535, 1986.CAS
  Google Scholar
 Turner J.W.Jr., Kirkpatrick J.F. Androgens, behavior, and fertility control in feral stallions. J. Reprod. Fertil. (Suppl.) 32: 79, 1982.Google Scholar
 Johnson L., Thompson D.L. Age-related and seasonal variation in the Sertoli cell population, daily sperm production and serum concentrations of follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone and testosterone in stallions. Biol. Reprod. 29: 777, 1983.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Coryn M., DeMoor A., Bouters R., Vandeplassche M. Clinical, morphological and endocrinological aspects of cryptorchidism in the horse. Theriogenology 16: 489, 1981.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Sharma O.P. Diurnal variation of plasma testosterone in stallions. Biol. Reprod. 15: 158, 1976.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Thompson D.L.Jr., Saint George R.L., Jones L.S., Garza F. Patterns of secretion of luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone and testosterone in stallions during the summer and winter. J. Animal Sci. 60: 741, 1985.CAS
  Google Scholar
 Hamilton M.J., Hughes I.M., Hegreberg G.A. Serum testosterone levels in young normal horses. Theriogenology 22: 417, 1984.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Wichman U., Wichman G., Krause W. Serum levels of testosterone precursors, testosterone, and estradiol in 10 animal species. Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. 83: 283, 1984.Article
  Google Scholar
 Thompson D.L., Gorza F., Ashby K.B., Wiest J.L. Androgen and progesterone effects on follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone secretions in anestrus mares. Biol. Reprod. 34: 51, 1986.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Norzu K., Dehejia A., Zarwistorwich K.J., Catl A.J., Safau M.L. Gonadotropin-induced desensitization of Leydig cells in vivo and in vitro: estrogen action in the testes. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 383: 212, 1982.Article
  Google Scholar
 Harris J.M., Clifford H.G., Evans M.J. Seasonal changes in serum levels of FSH, LH, and testosterone and in semen parameters in stallions. Theriogenology 19: 311, 1983.Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Thompson D.L., Honey P.G. Active immunizations of prepubertal colts against estrogens: hormonal and testicular responses after puberty. J. Animal Sci. 59: 189, 1984.CAS
  Google Scholar
 Natural N.G., Sato K., Meyake M. The seminal characteristics and serum testosterone concentrations of a monorchid and 6 normal colts. Res. Bull. Okihiro Univ. 10: 637, 1977.Google Scholar
 Rodbard D., Lewald J.E. Analysis of radioligand assay and radioimmunoassay data. Acta Endocrinol. (Kbh.) (Suppl.) 147: 79, 1970.CAS
  Google Scholar
 Kent M.G., Shoffner R.N., Hunter A., Elliston K.O., Schroder W., Tolley E., Wachtel S.S. XY sex reversal in the mare: clinical and behavioral studies. Hum. Genet., in press.Sharp S., Wachtel S.S., Benirschke K. H-Y antigen in a fertile XY female horse. J. Reprod. Fertil. 58: 157, 1980.PubMed
  Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Schellhas H.F. Malignant potential of the dysgenic gonad. Obstet. Gynecol. 44: 298, 1974.PubMed
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Simpson J.L. Disorders of sexual differentiation. Etiology and clinical delineation. Academic Press, New York, 1976.Google Scholar
 Wachtel S.S. H-Y antigen and the biology of sex determination. Grune and Stratton, New York, 1983.Google Scholar
 Download referencesCenter for Reproductive Biology, Spring Creek Ranch, Collierville, Tennessee, 38017M. G. Kent & H. E. SchnellerDepartment of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, University of Minnesota, College of Veterinary Medicine, St. Paul, Minnesota, 55108R. L. Hegsted & S. D. JohnstonCollege of Medicine, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of Tennessee, 853 Jefferson Avenue, Memphis, TN, 38163, USADr. S. S. WachtelCorrespondence to Dr. S. S. Wachtel.Reprints and PermissionsKent, M.G., Schneller, H.E., Hegsted, R.L. et al. Concentration of serum testosterone in XY sex reversed horses. J Endocrinol Invest 11, 609–613 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03350191Download citationReceived
15 January 1988Accepted
29 June 1988Published
09 April 2014Issue Date
September 1988DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03350191Instant access to the full article PDF.34,95 €Price includes VAT for Russian FederationImmediate online access to all issues from 2019. Subscription will auto renew annually.66,39 €This is the net price. Taxes to be calculated in checkout.Rent this article via DeepDyve.Learn more about Institutional subscriptionsAdvertisementOver 10 million scientific documents at your fingertipsNot logged in - 92.38.189.10Not affiliated© 2020 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature.AdvertisementHuman Genetics
 79, 
321–328(1988)Cite this article86 Accesses16 CitationsMetricsAn inherited genetic disorder causes XY embryos of the horse to develop as mares. On the basis of our study of 38 such mares, we have identified four grades or classes of XY sex reversal according to this scheme: class I, nearly normal female, of which some are fertile; class II, female with gonadal dysgenesis, normal mullerian development; calss III, intersex mare with gonadal dysgenesis, abnormal mullerian development, enlarged clitoris; class IV, virilized intersex characterized by high levels of testosterone. In general, class I and calss II mares were typed H-Y antigen-negative whereas class III and class IV mares were typed H-Y antigen-positive.This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.Burgoyne PS, Levy ER, McLaren A (1986) Spermatogenic failure in male mice lacking H-Y antigen. Nature 320:170–172Google Scholar
 Chandley AC, Fletcher J, Rossdale PD, Peace CK, Ricketts SW, McEnery RJ, Rhorne JP, Short RV, Allen WR (1975) Chromosome abnormalities as a cause of infertility in mares. J Reprod Fertil [Suppl] 23:377–383Google Scholar
 Hughes IP, Benirschke K, Kenndy PC, Trommerhause-Smith A (1975) Gonadal dysgenesis in the mare (case report of 5 cases). J Reprod Fertil [Suppl] 23:385Google Scholar
 Hughes JP, Trommerhausen-Smith A (1977) Infertility in the horse associated with chromosomal abnormalities. Aust Vet J 53:253–257Google Scholar
 Jaswaney VL, Wachtel SS (1988) Differential expression of H-Y antigen on lymphocyte subsets: analysis by flow cytometry. Differentiation 35:115–121Google Scholar
 Jost A (1970) Hormonal factors in the sex differentiation of the mammalian foetus. Philos Trans R Soc Lond [Biol] 259:119–130Google Scholar
 Kent MG, Shoffner RN, Bouen L, Weber AF (1986) XY sex-reversal in the domestic horse. Cytogenet Cell Genet 42:8–18Google Scholar
 Kieffer NM, Burns SJ, Judge NG (1976) Male pseudohermaphroditism of the testicular feminizing type in a horse. Equine Vet J 8: 38–41Google Scholar
 Lillie RD (1965) Histopathologic technique and practical histochemistry, 3rd edn. McGraw-Hill, New YorkGoogle Scholar
 McLaren A, Simpson E, Tomonari K, Chandler P, Hogg H (1984) Male sexual differentiation in mice lacking H-Y antigen. Nature 312:552–555Google Scholar
 Robboy SJ, Miller T, Donahoe PK, Jahre C, Welch WR, Haseltine FP, Miller WA, Atkins L, Crawford JD (1982) Dysgenesis of testicular and streak gonads in the syndrome of mixed gonadal dysgenesis: perspective derived from a clinicopathologic analysis of twenty-one cases. Hum Pathol 13:700–716Google Scholar
 Sharp AJ, Wachtel SS, Benirschke K (1980) H-Y antigen in a fertile XY female horse. J Reprod Fertil 58:157–160Google Scholar
 Simpson E, McLaren A, Chandler P (1982) Evidence for two male antigens in mice. Immunogenetics 15:609–614Google Scholar
 Simpson JL (1976) Disorders of sexual differentiation. Etiology and clinical delineation. Academic Press, New York LondonGoogle Scholar
 Trommerhausen-Smith A, Hughes JP, Neely DP (1979) Cytogenetic and clinical findings in mares with gonadal dysgenesis. J Reprod Fertil [Suppl] 27:271–276Google Scholar
 Wachtel SS (1983) H-Y antigen and the biology of sex determination. Grune & Stratton, New YorkGoogle Scholar
 Download referencesDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tennessee, 853 Jefferson, 38163, Memphis, TN, USAMarijo G. Kent & Stephen S. WachtelUniversity of Minnesota College of Veterinary Medicine, 55108, St. Paul, MN, USARobert N. Shoffner, Allan Hunter & Keith O. EllistonMinnesota Equine Practitioners, 55359, Maple Plain, MN, USAWesley SchroderDepartment of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Tennessee, 38163, Memphis, TN, USAElizabeth TolleyCenter for Reproductive Biology, 38017, Collierville, TN, USAMarijo G. Kent & Stephen S. WachtelCorrespondence to Stephen S. Wachtel.Reprints and PermissionsKent, M.G., Shoffner, R.N., Hunter, A. et al. XY sex reversal syndrome in the mare: clinical and behavioral studies, H-Y phenotype. Hum Genet 79, 321–328 (1988). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00282169Download citationReceived
15 September 1987Issue Date
August 1988DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00282169Instant access to the full article PDF.34,95 €Price includes VAT for Russian FederationImmediate online access to all issues from 2019. Subscription will auto renew annually.125,21 €This is the net price. Taxes to be calculated in checkout.Rent this article via DeepDyve.Learn more about Institutional subscriptionsAdvertisementOver 10 million scientific documents at your fingertipsNot logged in - 92.38.189.10Not affiliated© 2020 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature.We use cookies to ensure the functionality of our website, to personalize content and advertising, to provide social media features, and to analyze our traffic. If you allow us to do so, we also inform our social media, advertising and analysis partners about your use of our website. You can decide for yourself which categories you want to deny or allow. Please note that based on your settings not all functionalities of the site are available. View our privacy policyAuthor affiliationsAccurate quantification of DNA from cells of several species is possible with flow cytometry. When one species is used as a reference, cytometric readings from two or more different species can be compared to obtain relative percent DNA or DNA indices. Differences in DNA from the male and female of the same species also can be measured. The method allows rapid screening of chromosomal abnormalities among large clinical populations, and evaluation of errors of sex determination such as XY sex reversal.© 1988 S. Karger AG, BaselAccepted: January 05, 1987
Published online: May 09, 2008
Issue release date: 1988Number of Print Pages: 2
Number of Figures: 0
Number of Tables: 0ISSN: 1424-8581 (Print)
eISSN: 1424-859X (Online)For additional information: https://www.karger.com/CGR1988, Vol.47, No. 1-21988PREV Article NEXTPrivacy Policy | Terms of Use | ImprintKarger International: COM | DE | CN© 2020 S. Karger AG, BaselWorking off-campus? Learn about our remote access optionsVolume18, Issue3May 1986Pages 233-236© 1986 EVJ LtdContact UsMulberry House,
31 Market Street, Fordham,
Ely, Cambridgeshire,
CB7 5LQ
Email: info@beva.org.ukAuthor affiliationsThe XY sex-reversal syndrome occurs when a phenotypic mare is born that has the karyotype of a stallion. The syndrome is manifested by both genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity. The sex-reversed genetic condition occurs frequently within certain pedigrees where XY females have been found and can be readily detected by chromosome karyotyping. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from the feminine mare with a reproductive tract that is within normal limits to the greatly masculinized mare. Pedigree analysis suggests that there are two modes of inheritance: (1) an X-linked recessive or autosomal sex-limited dominant transmitted through the female and (2) an autosomal sex-limited dominant or a Y chromosomal mutation with variable expression transmitted through the male.© 1986 S. Karger AG, BaselAccepted: January 04, 1985
Published online: May 08, 2008
Issue release date: 1986Number of Print Pages: 11
Number of Figures: 0
Number of Tables: 0ISSN: 1424-8581 (Print)
eISSN: 1424-859X (Online)For additional information: https://www.karger.com/CGR1986, Vol.42, No. 1-21986PREV Article NEXTPrivacy Policy | Terms of Use | ImprintKarger International: COM | DE | CN© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel