Sex reversal is a complex biological phenomenon exhibited by Cynoglossus semilaevis. Some genetic females may irreversibly convert to pseudomales, thus increasing aquaculture costs because males grow much more slowly than females. In this study, an integrative analysis of transcriptome and proteome was performed to compare differences in gene and protein expression in females and pseudomales after gonad differentiation in C. semilaevis. Based on RNA-Seq results, 1893 genes showed differences in expression at the transcript level between females and pseudomales. Of these differentially expressed genes (DEGs), zona pellucida sperm-binding protein 4-like (LOC103393374 , ZP4), zona pellucida sperm-binding protein 4-like (LOC103396071, ZP4) and forkhead box L2 (foxl2) were highly expressed in females and doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1(dmrt1) and doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 3 (dmrt3) were highly expressed in pseudomales. GO enrichment analysis results indicate that wnt signaling pathways and oocyte maturation are two terms enriched in female. At the protein level, Tandem Mass Tags analysis revealed that 324 proteins differed in their relative abundance between pseudomales and females. KEGG analysis found that pseudo-highly expressed proteins were enriched in the ubiquitin mediated proteolysis pathway. For integrative analysis, the Spearman correlation coefficient between the transcriptome and proteome was 0.59. Among 52 related genes, 46 DEGs (88%) were well matched in their levels of change in protein abundance. These findings reveal major active pathways in female and pseudomale gonads after sex reversal and provide new insights into molecular mechanisms associated with sex reversal regulatory network.Cite this asCynoglossus semilaevis is a valuable commercial fish and is distributed along the coast of the Yellow Sea and the Bohai Sea of China (Jiang & Li, 2017). C. semilaevis is of ZW-type sex determination, with females being heterogametic (ZW♀) and males being homogametic (ZZ♂). Females have considerably higher growth rates than males, so that adult females are two to four times larger than adult males (Chen et al., 2009), and female fish are therefore more desirable in C. semilaevis aquaculture. However, during dph 50 to 100 some genetic females can develop into pseudomales, which grow just as slowly as normal males. Due to sex reversal, the cost of breeding C. semilaevis has increased and increasing and maintaining the level of females in a population has become an urgent and important issue in C. semilaevis aquaculture. In fact, sex reversal is so common that the percentage of females has gradually decreased to below 20% on average in recent years. Several reports have shown that sex reversal ratios are affected by temperature, but their conclusion are not consistent (Tian et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014). Therefore, whether sex reversal ratios are affected by environmental factors remained uncertain. Our previous studies have elucidated the genetic architecture underlying sex reversal in C. semilaevis. We identified two loci associated with sex reversal of C. semilaevis by genome-wide association study (GWAS). These two loci are located on the Z chromosome in the third intron of the F-box and leucine-rich repeat protein 17 (fbxl17) gene (Cyn_Z_6676874) and the third intron of the dmrt1 gene (Cyn_Z_8564889) (Jiang & Li, 2017; Cui et al., 2018). Genetic females that contain both the T allele of the Cyn_Z_6676874 locus and the A allele of the Cyn_Z_8564889 locus reverse into pseudomales and have provided scientific guidance for breeding and management of C. semilaevis aquaculture.A set of sex-biased genes potentially associated with growth and reproduction in tongue sole were identified by brain transcriptome analysis (Wang et al., 2016) and transcriptomic analysis revealed candidate networks and genes for sexual dimorphism of body size for C. semilaevis (Wang et al., 2018). The process of sex reversal is accompanied with many changes in transcription and translation of certain genes. However, few studies have been published to identify sex-biased proteins involved in sex reversal in C. semilaevis. The integrative analysis of the transcriptome and proteome is an efficient tool for identifying differential expressed genes at the whole-genome level. Comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analysis was successfully used to study the development of the mouse stomach and its relationship with the development of gastric cancer at the whole-genome level (Li et al., 2018). However, the relationship between mRNA and protein levels did not follow a simple correlation in which higher mRNA levels always associate with higher protein levels (Becker et al., 2018). In addition, previous studies have demonstrated poor correlation between the transcriptome and the proteome (Anatole et al., 2011; Gygi et al., 1999; Kramer et al., 2014). This divergence might be due to post-transcriptional and translational processes regulating the location, quantity, and efficiency of proteins in the cell. In this study, the comparison of main active pathways in female and pseudomale gonads after sex reversal in C. semilaevis were explored through an integrative analysis of the transcriptome and proteome.All procedures involving the handling and treatment of fish used in this study were conducted with the approval of the animal care and use committee of Chinse Academy of Fishery Sciences. All animal procedures were carried out according to the guide for the care and use of laboratory animals and the animal welfare in China.In July 2018, 100 C. semilaevis of 120 days post-hatch (dph) were randomly selected from Tianjin Haisheng Aquaculture Company and their fins and gonads sampled. In our study, experimental fish are taken from the same pond, the temperature of which was 22 °C–23 °C, which will exclude all environmental impacts. Fins were stored in 100% ethanol and the DNA was extracted using the TIANamp marine animal DNA kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (TIANGEN® Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). Gonads were frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored at −80 °C and RNA extracted using the TIANamp marine animal RNA kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (TIANGEN® Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The genetic sex was then determined with fin DNA using a previously described sex-specific marker (Liu et al., 2014). Phenotypic sex was determined by sequencing the Cyn_Z_6676874 and Cyn_Z_8564889 loci and verified by tissue sectioning of gonads (Figs. S1 and S2). The details of tissue sectioning are described in our previous study (Jiang & Li, 2017). Finally, gonad tissues from 4 pseudomales and 4 females were selected for transcriptomic and proteomic analysis.Gonad samples of 4 pseudomales and 4 females were subjected to RNA-Seq using an Illumina HiSeq Xten at the Novogene Biotechnology Co. Ltd (Beijing, China). For RNA-Seq, 3 µg total RNA from each sample was used to enrich mRNA for cDNA library construction. The cDNA library was generated using the NEB Next® UltraTM RNA Prep Kit for Illumina® (NEB, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Raw reads were filtered by removing low-quality reads with ambiguous nucleotides and adapter sequences of “AGATCGGAAGAGC” using FastQC software. Clean data were then aligned using Hisat2 (https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml) and mapped to C. semilaevis reference genome (NCBI: GCF_000523025.1_Cse_v1.0_genomic). Sequences were assembled based on alignment results and used for further analysis. Gene expression levels were further normalized using the fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) method to eliminate the influence of differences in gene lengths and the amount of sequencing data on calculations of gene expression (Wang et al., 2018). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between females and pseudomales were identified with an absolute log2FC ≥ 2 and a false discovery rate-adjusted P (q value) <0.05 using the ballgown package (https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/ballgown). The raw data of transcriptomes and proteomics obtained in this bioproject (PRJNA586726), have been deposited in Genbank-SRA under the accession numbers (SRR10492824 –SRR10492831).To validate the results of high-throughput transcriptome sequencing, 16 DEGs were selected for real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR). All genes used for quantification were selected based on factors such as PCR efficiency, gene expression level, and expression difference level. C. semilaevis β-actin gene was used as an internal reference (Li et al., 2010). Primers for the 16 DEGs were designed using Primer-blast based on the gene sequences from the RNA-Seq datasets (Table 1). Total RNA (1 µg) was reverse transcribed using the TOYOBO Reverse Transcription Kit then qRT-PCR conducted using SYBR® Green Reagents with 15 µL reactions, each containing 9 µL SYBR® Green, 0.3 µL forward primer, 0.3 µL reverse primer, 0.6 µL cDNA, and 4.8 µL ddH2O. The following PCR amplification procedure was used: 95 °C for 2 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s. All reactions were repeated 3 times (Livak & Schmittgen, 2001) and disassociation curve analysis performed using an ABI 7500 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) fast real-time PCR system. Relative expression levels for genes of interest in females and pseudomales were then calculated with the 2−△△Ct (Livak & Schmittgen, 2001) method and the log2 fold change obtained from qRT-PCR and RNA-Seq was compared.Frozen samples of pseudomale and female gonad tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen then the 100 mg of powdered sample transferred into a 1.5 mL tube containing 600 µL phenol extract and protease inhibitor. Samples were then ultrasonicated on ice then mixed with a phenol-tris-HCL saturated solution of equal volume for 30 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C, the upper phenol layer was transferred to a new tube and proteins precipitated using 0.1 M ammonium acetate-methanol at −20 ° C. Proteins were quantified using the BCA protein concentration assay (Smith et al., 1985). Next, 100 µg of protein was reduced with 120 µL of reducing agent buffer (10 mM DTT, 8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) at 60 °C for 1 h. Reduced proteins were then alkylated for 40 min at room temperature in the dark by the addition of IAA to a final concentration of 50 mM. Proteins were then digested with 2 µL of 1 µg/µL trypsin per sample for 12 h at 37 °C (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Digested peptides were collected, mixed with 50 µL of 200 mM TEAB buffer, then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 20 min and the resulting lower layer collected and lyophilized. Samples were then resuspended in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and the peptides labeled using the TMT labeling reagent for 1.5 h at room temperature (Xiao et al., 2016; Guerreiro et al., 2014).After labeling, samples were mixed in a tube and dried with a vacuum pump. Pooled mixtures were fractionated using an Agilent 1100 HPLC with an ultraviolet (UV) absorption detector (210 nm and 280 nm) and a flow rate of 300 µL/min. Eluted peptides were grouped into 10 final fractions, desalted on an Agilent Zorbax Extend C18 column (2. 1 ×150 mm), and vacuum dried. LC–MS/MS analysis of each fraction was then performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatograph and peptides eluted using a gradient of 2–80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 120 min on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). The MS scanning range was 300–1,600 m/z and the top 10 most intense signals were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The resolutions of the MS and the MS/MS scans were 70,000 and 17,500, respectively, and the dynamic exclusion set to 15 s. Experimental data was analyzed by Proteome Discoverer ™ 2.2 (Thermo, USA) software. The protein database used was Acanthomorphata uniprot and the false discovery rate of peptide identification was below 1%. After mass spectrometry analysis, results were retrieved from the database and relevant proteins separated. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified based on fold changes (FC) calculated by comparing pseudomale and female groups and p-values were obtained by t-tests. Proteins that were significantly differentially expressed were defined by FC >1.5 or FC <2/3 and a p-value <0.05.Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis was used to determine biological functions significantly associated with DEGs or DEPs, including relevant molecular functions, cell components, and biological processes. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was used to aid biological interpretation of DEGs and DEPs. GO functional enrichment analysis for DEGs and DEPs was conducted using the online tool DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis performed with the KOBAS 3.0 online tool (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/). Since C. semilaevis is a non-model species, genes were mapped to the zebrafish function database for analysis.The Spearman correlation coefficient between mRNA and protein expression was calculated for genes differentially expressed in both transcriptome and proteome analysis to avoid masking effects of random variation. DEG sequences were extracted from RNA-Seq data and used as a nucleic acid database for alignment. Amino acid sequences of peptides from DEPs were aligned as queries to the DEGs database using the tblastn (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) command, then the genes differentially expressed at both the transcriptome and proteome levels extracted. An alignment result of identity ≥ 80%, e-value ≤ 1, and gap = 0 indicated a perfect matched between mRNA and protein sequences. Spearman correlation coefficients were calculated based on mean fold changes for mRNA and protein expression.A total of 194 Gb of sequence was generated using eight C. semilaevis gonadal tissue libraries. After quality control and adapter removal, 150.7 Gb of clean reads were obtained, 85.14%–89.43% of which were mapped to C. semilaevis genome. The assembled transcriptome consists of 46,317 transcripts belonging to 25,761 genes. A total of 2,172 (FDR < 1%) reliable proteins were identified by combining high-throughput TMT technology with high-resolution LC-MS/MS technology (Table 2).We identified a total of 1,893 differentially expressed genes between females and pseudomales (Table S1). Of all the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 785 genes were more highly expressed in females while 1,108 genes were more highly expressed in pseudomales (Fig. 1). These differentially expressed genes included several sex-related genes, such as dmrt1, dmrt3 and foxl2. The expression levels of dmrt1 and dmrt3 in pseudomales were 5.09 FC and 16.82 FC higher than in females, respectively. The expression level of foxl2 in females was 44.21 FC higher than in pseudomales.GO enrichment analysis indicated significant enrichment of 49 GO terms (p < 0.05). Among them, 32 GO terms were identified from 785 genes highly expressed in females (Fig. 2) and 17 GO terms were identified from 1,108 genes highly expressed in pseudomales (Fig. 3). Of these 32 GO terms highly expressed in females, DNA replication initiation is most significant. In addition, biological processes including wnt signaling pathways, cell development, and oocyte maturation are enriched. Cellular component category extracellular space is enriched with the largest number of differential genes. For molecular functions classification, transforming growth factor beta receptor binding was most significantly enriched. Moreover, the top three categories were growth factor activity, methyltransferase activity, and cytokine activity. Among the 17 GO terms highly expressed in pseudomales, autophagy enrichment was the most significant and cytoplasm enriched with the largest number of differential genes.KEGG analysis assigned the 1893 DEGs to 30 pathways, in which 19 pathways of highly expressed in females were enriched (Fig. 4), and 11 pathways that are highly expressed in pseudomales are enriched (Fig. 5). Of the 19 pathways, cell cycle was the most significantly enriched. In addition, progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation and oocyte meiosis closely related to female germ cells were enriched. Of the 11 pathways, adipocytokine signaling pathway is the most significant enriched.Transcriptional regulation revealed by RNA-Seq data was confirmed in a biologically independent experiment using qRT-PCR. A total of 16 genes, including general transcription factor IIIA (gtf3a), somatomedin B and thrombospondin type 1 domain containing (sbspon), cysteine rich transmembrane module containing 1 (cystm1), POC1 centriolar protein A (poc1a), doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (dmrt1), doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 3 (dmrt3), wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 9B (wnt9b), forkhead box L2 (foxl2), zona pellucida sperm-binding protein 4-like (LOC103393374, ZP4), zona pellucida sperm-binding protein 4-like (LOC103396071, ZP4), charged multivesicular body protein 1b-like (LOC103391323), LOC103392682, cilia- and flagella-associated protein 157-like (LOC103394689), tubulin alpha-1C chain-like (LOC103391404), NAD(P)H dehydrogenase [quinone] 1-like (LOC103392072), and LOC103379620 were selected for qRT-PCR analysis. 16 DEGs including nine up-regulated genes were highly expressed in pseudomale (dmrt1, dmrt3, sbspon, cystm1, poc1a, LOC103391323, LOC103392682, LOC103394689, LOC103391404) and others were down-regulated in pseudomale. Except for the gene of dmrt3, other genes were more quantitative than RNA-Seq, but similar up-regulation or down-regulation patterns of these genes were observed in qRT-PCR and RNA-Seq results (Fig. 6). Further Pearson correlation analysis of qRT-PCR and RNA-Seq showed that their correlation was ρ = 0.98. This indicates that qRT-PCR can effectively validate the results of RNA-Seq.A comparative proteome survey was performed of females and pseudomales using the TMT technique to complement the transcriptome experiments. Out of 2172 reliable proteins, 184 up-regulated proteins and 140 down-regulated proteins were identified in pseudomales compared to females (Fig. 7 and Table S2). Enrichment analysis of DEP’s biological process showed that cytoplasmic mRNA processing body assembly, RNA processing and protein polymerization are the top three females with high expression of DEP enrichment (Fig. 8), while regulation of DNA-templated transcription, elongation is the high expression of DEPs in pseudomales enrich the most significant term (Fig. 9). In addition, U6 snRNP and nucleus are two terms in which female and pseudo-male highly expressed DEPs are enriched in cell component categories, respectively. RNA binding and nucleotide binding are the two main categories of high expression DEPs in females and pseudomales under molecular function, respectively.KEGG pathway analysis of the female highly expressed proteins revealed that RNA degradation was the most significantly pathway, and the following is spliceosome and metabolic pathways (Fig. 10). However, KEGG pathway analysis of the pseudomale highly expressed proteins founded that protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, PPAR signaling pathway and fatty acid biosynthesis were the top three pathways (Fig. 11).Notes:Up and down refers to the expression in pseudomales compared with females.A total of 52 genes were differentially expressed between females and pseudomales at both the transcriptomic and proteomic levels. Further correlation analysis for these 52 genes revealed that ρ = 0.59 (p < 0.05) for the mRNA–protein correlations. Among these 52 related genes, 46 DEGs (88%) were well matched in their levels of protein abundance change. Additionally, compared to females, 33 genes were up-regulated in pseudomales, based on both transcriptomic and proteomic analysis, including YOD1 deubiquitinase (yod1), ubiquitin recognition factor in ER associated degradation 1 (ufd1), MINDY lysine 48 deubiquitinase 3 (mindy3), ubiquitin like domain containing CTD phosphatase 1 (ublcp1) and ADP ribosylation factor like GTPase 1 (arl1), importin 4 (ipo4), microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha (map1lc3a). Transcriptomic and proteomic analysis both indicated the down-regulation of 13 genes, including Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor alpha (arhgdia), neural cell adhesion molecule 1-like (LOC103395384), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E nuclear import factor 1 (eif4enif1), aldehyde dehydrogenase 6 family member A1 (aldh6a1), and zygote arrest 1 (zar1). Six genes displayed decoupling patterns between the transcriptome and the proteome. Both LOC103376887 and heat shock 60 protein 1 (hspd1) were up-regulated in proteome analysis while the corresponding DEGs were down-regulated at transcript level. Creatine kinase M-type (LOC103377896) and sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 2-like (LOC103383309) were both down-regulated at the translation level but up-regulated at the transcriptomic level (Table 3). GO function analysis found that arl1, map1lc3a, and yod1 were enriched in cytosolic component while arl1, ipo4, hspd1, arhgdia, and zar1 were enriched in the cytoplasm component.Sex development is a complex process, consisting of sex determination, initiation, differentiation and maintenance, ultimately producing sperm or eggs for germline transmission (Zhang et al., 2016). In this study, we performed integrative analysis of the transcriptomes and proteomes of gonadal tissues of C. semilaevis females and pseudomales. Our findings suggested that dmrt1, dmrt3, and foxl2 showed differential expression after C. semilaevis reversal, which may be related to the maintenance of the gonad phenotype after sexual reversion. Studies have shown that males with dmrt1 mutations form ovary-like testes while expression of the female-related gene foxl2 was significantly increased in the gonads of these mutants (Cui et al., 2017). In addition, abundant dmrt3 expression has been detected in adult Takifugu rubripes testes, with lower levels of ovarian expression (Yamaguchi et al., 2006). Expression of dmrt3 has been detected in developing sperm cells in the testes and in developing oocytes in the ovaries of Monopterus albus (Sheng et al., 2014). This evidences collectively demonstrates that dmrt1 and dmrt3 may be associated with gonadal development in C. semilaevis, which was consistent with previous studies (Wang et al., 2019; Dong, Chen & Ji, 2010). Foxl2 is a critical factor essential for ovary differentiation and maintenance, which is also a depressor for the genetic program for somatic testis determination (Uhlenhaut et al., 2009). In other studies, foxl2 expression was significantly higher in ovaries compared to other tissues, so it was deduced that the foxl2 regulates early differentiation of the ovaries in reproduction via the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad axis and its function is conserved (Lyu et al., 2019). ZP4 is component of the zona pellucida, an extracellular matrix surrounding oocytes which mediates sperm binding, may act as a sperm receptor. Down-regulation foxl2 and ZP4, such “female-specific” genes in pseudomales, also showed the sex-reversal from female to male occured at transcript level. Recent study reported that the methylation level of cyp19a1a promoter was higher in gonads in females than in males and pseudomales, suggested that cyp19a1a might be the mechanism for the temperature induced masculinization in C. semilaevis (Liu et al., 2019). However, the cyp19a1a gene was not found in our data, which might be due to its low expression level at certain conditions.The wnt signaling pathway is a conservative signaling network involved in embryonic development, cell differentiation and proliferation, and growth regulation. Our findings indicate that female highly expressed genes are enriched to the wnt signaling pathway. Wnt is a secreted glycoprotein, and of which different subtypes have been found in animals (Gao et al., 2014). Wnt4 is regarded as a sex determination gene that plays a key role in the morphological development of female mammals (Jordan et al., 2001). Wnt4 regulates müllerian duct formation and the generation of ovarian steroids (Biason-Lauber et al., 2004). Due to our strict differential genetic selection criteria, wnt4 was not identified as a differentially expressed gene in our results. However, querying its expression in transcriptome data found that it is only expressed in females and that wnt4 mRNA levels in pseudomales are close to zero. In this study, wnt9b was differentially expressed based on our transcriptome data is clearly enriched in the wnt signaling pathway, indicating a regulatory role. Additionally, wnt9b plays a role of organizing signal in the regulation of the mammalian urogenital system (Carroll et al., 2005). Further research is required to elucidate the roles of these genes in the reproductive process of C. semilaevis.The most important biological processes in the testis and ovaries are spermatogenesis and oogenesis, respectively. As expected, differentially expressed genes we identified include genes associated with oocyte generation stage. The enrichment of progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation and oocyte meiosis pathways in KEGG pathway analysis of the transcriptomes indicated that the gonad function has changed after sex reversal. Previously, sectioning ZW fish revealed chimeric gonads before completion of sex reversal was completed, with normal male gonads present after reversal was complete (Jiang & Li, 2017).In this study, four ubiquitin-related genes yod1, ufd1, mindy3 and ublcp1 were found to be up-regulated in pseudomales and the corresponding proteins were also up-regulated. In addition, pseudo-highly expressed proteins were also significantly enriched in the ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway. Ubiquitin is a small molecular weight protein commonly found in eukaryotic cells. It participates in the selective degradation of most proteins, also plays an important role in various cell life activities, such as signal transduction, immunity response, transcription and translation (Hershko & Ciechanover, 1998). Therefore, we speculated that protein ubiquitination may be related to some changes in gonad development after sexual reversal. Several studies have analyzed several sperm quality measurements and confirmed their association with ubiquitination (Sutovsky, Terada & Schatten, 2001; Peter et al., 2003; Christopher, Rex & Gary, 2004; Muratori et al., 2005; Ozanon, Chouteau & Sutovsky, 2005; Lovercamp et al., 2008). In addition, the number of ubiquitinated sperm in semen samples is related to infertility or poor sperm quality in humans (Sutovsky, Terada & Schatten, 2001; Ozanon, Chouteau & Sutovsky, 2005), stallions (Peter et al., 2003), bulls (Peter, Evelyn & Gerald, 2002) and boar (Christopher, Rex & Gary, 2004; Lovercamp et al., 2008). The potential effect of ubiquitination on sexual reversal in C. semilaevis needs to be investigated in the future.Recently, genomics and proteomics studies have shown that although proteins are translated from mRNA, the levels of protein and mRNA are not well correlated (Greenbaum et al., 2003);). Therefore, protein levels cannot be reliably predicted from gene expression. Consistent with previous findings, mRNA and protein correlations were also moderate in this study (Spearman correlation coefficients were 0.59). As previously discussed, only a small fraction of corresponding mRNA and protein pairs were identified in transcriptome and proteome correlation analysis, moreover, 6 genes showed inconsistencies in transcription and protein levels. These results suggest that changes in mRNA levels provide limited insight into changes in protein expression, and this result builds an evidence that mRNA expression is not sufficient to fully understand expression changes. The discrepancies between mRNA and protein may be related to complex post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms, different kinetics of RNA or protein degradation, and detection limits or biases of instruments that measure mRNA and protein, among other origins (Li et al., 2018).RNA-Seq revealed that 1893 genes, including the sex-related genes dmrt1, dmrt3 and foxl2 were found to be differentially expressed between pseudomales and females. At the transcription level, female high-expression genes are mainly enriched in terms of DNA replication initiation, wnt signaling pathways, cell development and oocyte maturation, and enriched in pathways of cell cycle, progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation and oocyte meiosis. The pseudomale-highly expressed genes are mainly enriched in autophagy and cytoplasm term, and adipocytokine signaling pathway and metabolic pathway. At the protein level, cytoplasmic mRNA processing body assembly, RNA processing and protein polymerization are the top three terms female with high expression of DEP enrichment. RNA degradation, spliceosome and metabolic pathways are the top three pathways female with high expression of DEP enrichment. However, regulation of DNA-templated transcription, elongation is the high expression of proteins in pseudomales enrich the most significant term. Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, PPAR signaling pathway and fatty acid biosynthesis were the top three pathways of the pseudomale highly expressed proteins.The authors declare there are no competing interests.Zhan Ye performed the experiments, analyzed the data, prepared figures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.Weifeng Wang analyzed the data, prepared figures and/or tables, and approved the final draft.Yaqun Zhang conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.Liping Wang and Yu Cui performed the experiments, prepared figures and/or tables, and approved the final draft.Hengde Li conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.The following information was supplied relating to ethical approvals (i.e., approving body and any reference numbers):The Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences provided full approval for this research.The following information was supplied regarding the deposition of DNA sequences:The raw data of transcriptomes and proteomics obtained in this bioproject (PRJNA586726) are available at Genbank: SRR10492824, SRR10492825, SRR10492826, SRR10492827, SRR10492828, SRR10492829, SRR10492830, SRR10492831.The following information was supplied regarding data availability:The data is available at Zenodo: Ye, Zhan. (2020). sex reversal transcriptomic analysis in Chinese tongue sole [Data set]. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3507269.This study was financially supported by Central Public-interest Scientific Institution Basal Research Fund, CAFS (NO.2019A003) and the Special Scientific Research Funds for Central Non-profit Institutes, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences (2020TD24). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.Research Jobs, Collaborations, & TasksImpact Factor 3.258 | CiteScore 2.7
More on impact ›Xiamen University, ChinaHuazhong Agricultural University, ChinaCONICET Instituto Tecnológico de Chascomús (INTECH), ArgentinaShantou University, ChinaThe editor and reviewers' affiliations are the latest provided on their Loop research profiles and may not reflect their situation at the time of review.Suggest a Research Topic >The sex of Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) is determined by both genetic sex determination (GSD) and environmental sex determination (ESD), making it an ideal model to study the relationship between sex-determination and temperature. In the present study, transcriptomes of undifferentiated gonads from genetic females and males, as well as differentiated gonads from males, females, and pseudomales under high and normal temperature treatments were generated for comparative transcriptomic analysis. A mean of 68.24 M high-quality clean reads was obtained for each library. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between different sexes and environmental treatments were identified, revealing that the heat shock protein gene family was involved in the high temperature induced sex reversal. The Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways that were enriched in pseudomale and genetic female comparison included neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cortisol synthesis and secretion, and steroid hormone biosynthesis. Furthermore, weighted gene co-expression network analyses were conducted on all samples, and two modules were positive correlated with pseudomale under high temperature. An illustrated protein-protein interaction map of the module identified a hub gene, hsc70. These findings provide insights into the genetic network that is involved in sex determination and sexual differentiation, and improve our understanding of genes involved in sex reversal under high temperature.Sexually dimorphic traits play a dominant role in evolution and behavior of animals, and genes regulating sex-determination and sexual development have long been of central interest in developmental biology. In vertebrates, sex determination mechanisms are broadly divided into two major categories: genetic sex determination (GSD) and environmental sex determination (ESD) (Marshall Graves, 2008). In GSD, the primary sex is determined during fertilization and regulated by heritable genetic components (Budd et al., 2015). In contrast, organisms possess ESD have undifferentiated gonads until they reach a sensitive period perceiving the environmental factors to determine the sex (Shao et al., 2014). Interestingly, some GSD species, mainly fish and reptiles, can change their primary sex without changing the genotype when exposed to environmental factors, a process known as environmental sex reversal (ESR) (Sarre et al., 2011; Shao et al., 2014; Holleley et al., 2015). Temperature is the most broadly studied factor that induces ESR. For example, Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) exposed to elevated temperature can override genetic sex determination, and the females can be reversed to produce pseudomales (Baroiller et al., 2009). Blue tilapia (Oreochromis aureus), Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus), European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) and Atlantic silverside (Menidia menidia) also undergo temperature induced ESR (Conover and Fleisher, 1986; Desprez and Mélard, 1998; Yamaguchi et al., 2007; Diaz and Piferrer, 2015; Robledo et al., 2015; Diaz and Piferrer, 2017).Previous studies have found that epigenetic changes are involved in regulating ESR. In the European sea bass and Nile tilapia, juveniles exposed to high temperatures show increased methylation in the cyp19a1a promoter, which correlated to the masculinization of these individuals (Navarro-Martin et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2017). In red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans) (ESD), high temperature lead KDM6B, the histone H3 lysine 27 demethylase, to promote the transcription of the male sex-determining gene dmrt1. Therefore, a direct genetic link between epigenetic mechanisms and temperature-dependent sex determination has been shown in a turtle species (Ge et al., 2018).Development of sexual traits is a complex process that involves a network of genes. Genes related to sex-determination (e.g. cyp19a1a and amh) and epigenetic regulators appear to be downstream factors in the ESR related pathways. Therefore, the identification of more upstream genes responding to the change in temperature is critical to further our understanding of ESR. Transcriptomic analyses can serve as a powerful tool to identify potential upstream regulators. The gonad transcriptome of Nile tilapia revealed numerous genes involved in temperature dependent ESR (Sun et al., 2018). In sea bass and pejerrey (Odontesthes bonariensis), transcriptomes of the developing gonads identified pathways involved in sex differentiation affected by temperature (Fernandino et al., 2011; Diaz and Piferrer, 2015). These reports were either in mature fish or did not test for fish that underwent ESR. Thus, genes involved in early development and temperature-induced ESR remains elusive.Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) is an economically important marine flatfish with ZZ/ZW sex chromosome system (GSD) and the genome has been sequenced (Chen et al., 2014). Genotypic females of the Chinese tongue sole can be transformed into pseudomales when exposed to high temperatures during the crucial stage of sex differentiation, and epigenetic regulation is important during this process (Chen et al., 2014; Shao et al., 2014). Therefore, C. semilaevis is an ideal model to illuminate the relationship between sex-determination and temperature during ESR. Previous studies identified genes related to sexual dimorphism through transcriptome analysis of adult C. semilaevis (Guo et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019). Gene expression patterns in the gonads of C. semilaevis before and after ESR remain unclear, partly due to the difficulty in distinguishing pseudomales at early stage. Excitedly, recent studies have uncovered sex determining gene dmrt1, and new single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci associated with pseudomales, allowing for the detection of male, female, and pseudomale C. semilaevis (Cui et al., 2017; Jiang and Li, 2017; Cui et al., 2018).In the present study, transcriptomic analysis was conducted on undifferentiated gonads from genetic females and males, plus differentiated gonads from males, females, and pseudomales under high temperature and normal temperature treatment. A large number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between female, male, and pseudomales under high and normal temperature were obtained. DEGs were functionally analyzed via GO term and KEGG pathway enrichment. The heat shock protein (hsp) gene family and several pathways, such as steroid hormone biosynthesis, cortisol synthesis and secretion, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, were differentially expressed. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was employed to identify pseudomale-related genetic modules and hsc70 was identified as hub gene regulates the formation of pseudomales. These results provide new insights into the genes involved in sex determination and ESR in C. semilaevis.C. semilaevis were kept in Laizhou Mingbo Aquatic Co., Ltd., in Yantai, China. Approximately 300 larvae from the same family were fed twice a day with commercial pellets and were reared in filtered seawater at 22°C. For the undifferentiated group (30 dpf_F and 30dpf_M), twenty larvae were sampled at 30-day post fertilization (dpf). The remaining larvae were divided into two equal groups and cultured in two 300 L tanks. The control group was cultured at 22°C (C22_F, C22_M, C22_P), and the high temperature group was cultured at 28°C (C28_F, C28_M, C28_P) until 3-month post fertilization (mpf) when sex differentiation was completed. Gonads were collected from the 30 dpf and 3 mpf C. semilaevis individuals for RNA extraction and immediately stored in liquid nitrogen. The remaining part of each fish was stored in ethanol to identify the genetic sex.Genomic DNA was extracted from small pieces of tail fin using the phenol-chloroform method, and genetic sex was identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) against sex-specific simple sequence repeat (SSR) marker with the primers described previously (Liu et al., 2014). Pseudomales at 3 mpf were identified by PCR to detect the two SNP loci associated with sex reversal as previously described (Jiang and Li, 2017; Cui et al., 2018). The relative expression level of dmrt1 was measured to further confirm male, female, and pseudomale individuals by real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) (Cui et al., 2017).Total RNA was isolated from each gonad sample using the Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The qualities of the RNA samples were measured with the Agilent 2100RNA 6000 Nano kit (Agilent, USA). Three biological replicate samples for each group were generated. Thus, 24 samples of 30 dpf_F1-3, 30 dpf_M1-3, C22_F1-3, C22_M1-3, C22_P1-3, C28_F1-3, C28_M1-3, and C28_P1-3 were acquired. RNA sequencing was conducted with a BGISEQ-500 by PTM Biolabs (Hangzhou, China).The sequencing reads were filtered using the SOAPnuke v1.4.0 (Chen et al., 2018) and trimmomatic (Bolger et al., 2014) software using default parameters to remove adapters, low quality reads with more than 5% unknown nucleotides, and reads with more than 20% low-quality bases (Q value <10). The filtered clean data were subsequently mapped to the C. semilaevis genome (NCBI Cse_v1.0) via HISAT2 v2.1.0 (Kim et al., 2015) and aligned with the reference transcript sequence using Bowtie2 v2.2.5 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012) for removing rRNA sequences and annotating genes.Abundances of transcripts were quantified by RNA-Seq by Expectation Maximization (RSEM) (Li and Dewey, 2011), and gene expression level was further normalized using the Fragments Per Kilobase Million (FPKM) method to eliminate the influence of different gene lengths and amount of sequencing data on the calculation of gene expression. Differential expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using DEGseq and DEseq2 (Wang et al., 2010; Love et al., 2014). Transcripts with a fold change ≥2 and adjusted p (q value) < 0.001 were considered to be significant DEGs. DEGs were then subjected to an enrichment analysis for GO function and KEGG pathways using Phyper in R (Johnson et al, 1992), with p value < 0.05 as threshold. The cluster analysis of DEGs was processed using Pheatmap in R (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=pheatmap).To further understand the relationships between DEGs, a network analysis based on gene-to-gene correlations was performed using the R package WGCNA V1.48 (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008). Expression correlation coefficients of genes were calculated to search a suitable soft threshold to build gene networks using a scale-free topology model. Subsequently, gene modules with similar expression patterns were identified based on the resulting gene cluster dendrogram and using the dynamic tree cut method (GeneFrac Threshold 0.5). GO term and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses of the annotated genes were performed for each module and p value < 0.05 was defined as the threshold for significance. The protein–protein interaction network was predicted using DIAMOND (Buchfink et al., 2015) to map the genes to the STRING database, and score ≥300 was set as the threshold.Nine candidate genes related to high temperature induced sex-reversal from the female, pseudomale, and male between the heat versus control temperature were validated with qRT-PCR. Primers (Table S1) were designed based on sequences from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database. β-actin gene was used as the internal control (Wang et al., 2018). One microgram total RNAs for high-throughput transcriptome sequencing was reverse transcribed into cDNA with the PrimeScript™ RT reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser (Takara, Japan). Then, qRT-PCR was performed using QuantiNova™ SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen, Germany) in 20-µl reactions, containing 10 µl 2 × SYBR Green PCR Master Mix, 2 µl QN ROX Reference Dye, 0.7 µM forward primer, 0.7 µM reverse primer, and 1 µl cDNA. The cycling program was carried out at 95°C for 2 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s and 60°C for 10 s; this was followed by a melting curve analysis in an ABI StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, USA). Reactions were performed in triplicate. The relative expression fold changes of nine genes in female, pseudomale, and male gonads under normal and high temperature were analyzed using the 2−ΔΔCt method.The average weight of larvae sampled at 30 dpf was 0.080 ± 0.004 g, with the average length of 2.513 ± 0.041 cm. At 3 mpf, the average weight of normal temperature group was 1.312 ± 0.080 g, with the average length of 5.689 ± 0.136 cm. The average weight of high temperature group was 1.916 ± 0.127 g, and the average length of 6.911 ± 0.206 cm. The genetic sex of 30 dpf and 3 mpf female and male were distinguished using PCR of SSR marker. The genetic male had Z-specific derived band, and the genetic female had both W-specific and Z-specific derived bands. The genetic females that carried the T allele of Cyn_Z_6676874 and the A allele of Cyn_Z_8564889 may change into pseudomales. In addition, the relative expression of dmrt1 was high in males, low in females, and moderate in pseudomales (Figure S1).A total of 24 libraries, named C22_F 1-3, C22_M 1-3, C22_P 1-3, C28_F 1-3, C28_M 1-3, C28_P 1-3, 30dpf_F 1-3, 30dpf_M 1-3, were constructed using total RNA from gonads. A mean of 68.24 M filtered clean reads with a Q20 above 96.81% was obtained from each library (Table S2). Of the clean reads, 87.82–90.80% mapped to the C. semilaevis genome (NCBI Cse_v1.0) (Table S3), and a total of 25,022 known genes were identified in the transcriptome based on the C. semilaevis genome. The transcriptome data has been uploaded to NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA). The accession number was PRJNA576366.Using an adjusted p value of less than 0.001 and an absolute fold change greater than 2 as the threshold, over 1500 DEGs were obtained for each comparison, and the number of DEGs were highly variable, depending on the sex and environmental temperature treatment (Figure 1).Figure 1 Number of differentially expressed genes. DEGs identified from each comparison groups. Red and blue indicate up-regulated genes and down-regulated genes, respectively.To explore differences in gene expression between genetic females and males before sex differentiation, GO and KEGG enrichment analyses of DEGs between 30dpf_F and 30dpf_M was conducted. In the gonadal primordium region, 13 GO terms were significantly enriched with q < 0.05. The enriched GO terms were mainly related to muscle development, including muscle organ development, striated muscle cell development and differentiation (Figure S2A). Subsequently, KEGG enrichment analysis revealed that 17 pathways were significantly enriched in the gonadal primordium region (q < 0.05), including complement and coagulation cascades, calcium signaling pathway, and apelin signaling pathway (Figure S2B).Genes that were differentially expressed in phenotypic females and males after sex differentiation were evaluated by identifying DEGs in C22_F vs C22_M. There were 10 GO significantly enriched (q < 0.05). Including DNA integration, microtubule-based process, DNA conformation change, nucleosome assembly, and protein-DNA complex assembly (Figure S2C). KEGG enrichment analysis identified 32 significantly enriched pathways in the differentiated gonads (p < 0.05). Among these, nine pathways were significantly enriched (q < 0.05), including pancreatic secretion, calcium signaling pathway, circadian entrainment, and oocyte meiosis (Figure S2D).Gene expression changes in individuals exposed to high temperature conditions were identified by comparing C28_F vs C28_M. There were 221 significantly enriched GO terms (p < 0.05), including DNA binding, aminoglycan metabolic process, ion gated channel activity, DNA metabolic process, and temperature homeostasis (Figure S2E and Table S4). In addition, there were 20 enriched KEGG pathways (q < 0.05), including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cell cycle, p53 signaling pathway, and ovarian steroidogenesis (Figure S2F). In addition, circadian entrainment, oocyte meiosis, and calcium signaling pathway were enriched, and these three pathways were also enriched in the in the C22_F vs C22_M comparison.DEGs that were identified from the 30dpf_F vs 30dpf_M comparison were mainly enriched in genes involved in muscle development, therefore we focused on the remaining shared 943 DEGs that were identified from the C22_F vs C22_M and C28_F vs C28_M comparisons, which included sex-related genes, such as figla, foxl2, amh, and dmrt1. DEGs were further analyzed using GO annotations to identify their potential functions. In biological process, cellular process, single-organism process, and biological regulation were the most abundant GO function items, while binding, catalytic activity, and transporter activity were most abundant in molecular function. In cellular component, GO terms for cell, cell part, and membrane were enriched. In KEGG enrichment analysis, 18 KEGG pathways were significantly enriched (p < 0.05), including cell cycle, oocyte meiosis, hedgehog signaling pathway, calcium signaling pathway, neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, and pancreatic secretion (Figure 2).Figure 2 Analysis of DEGs between females and males. (A) Number of DEGs between females and males shown by Venn diagram. (B) GO classifications of 943 DEGs belong to C22_F vs C22_M and C28_F vs C28_M excluding 30dpf_F vs 30dpf_M. (C) Enriched KEGG pathways of the 943 DEGs (p < 0.05).To explore the gonadal-specific effects of temperature, DEGs were identified for females, males and pseudomales under high and normal temperature treatments. There were 534 DEGs shared in females, males and pseudomales when exposed to high temperature. DEGs were most enriched in the biological process functional items including cellular process, single-organism process, and metabolic process. Binding, catalytic activity, and transporter activity were most abundant in molecular function. In cellular component, cell, cell part, and membrane, were enriched. In KEGG enrichment analysis, 25 KEGG pathways were significantly enriched (p < 0.05), including nitrogen metabolism, glucagon signaling pathway, phototransduction, adipocytokine signaling pathway, FoxO signaling pathway, and hippo signaling pathway (Figure 3).Figure 3 Analysis of DEGs in females, males, and pseudomales between high temperature and normal temperature. (A) Number of DEGs between high temperature and normal temperature shown by Venn diagram. (B) GO classifications of 534 DEGs in females, males and pseudomales between high temperature and normal temperature. (C) Enriched KEGG pathways of the 534 DEGs (p < 0.05).Pseudomales develop from genetic females. To identify the changes in gene expression in pseudomales under high and normal temperature conditions, 7735 DEGs in both C22_P vs 30dpf_F and C28_P vs 30dpf_F comparisons were identified (Figure 4A). These DEGs were further screened by their relative expression pattern in C22_P and C28_P, and then divided into two categories (Figure 4B and Table S5). In the first category, heat shock protein family, including hspa13 (heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 13), hspa5 (heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5), hsp90b1 (heat shock protein 90 beta family member 1), hspd1 (heat shock protein family D (Hsp60) member 1), and hspb9 (heat shock protein family B (small) member 9) were up-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P. The male-related genes dmrt1 and sox6 were also up-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P. Other genes that were up-regulated in the high temperature treated pseudomales included the vasopressin V2 receptor (LOC103384583), which is involved in signal transduction, the bag3 and BAG family molecular chaperone regulator 4-like (LOC103398065) which were co-chaperones for HSP70 and HSC70 chaperone proteins, and cyp11b-like, which is responsible for glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid biosynthesis. KEGG enrichment analysis of this group of genes found 24 enriched pathways (q < 0.05). These pathways included steroid hormone biosynthesis, metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, and carbon metabolism (Figure 4C). The second category included hsd17b3-like (testosterone 17-beta-dehydrogenase 3-like), fshr (follicle stimulating hormone receptor), aromatase-like, female-related foxl2 and wnt5b, and 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases hsd11b1-like, which were down-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P. These DEGs had 30 significantly enriched KEGG pathways (q < 0.05), including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cortisol synthesis and secretion, progesterone-mediated oocyte maturation, and estrogen signaling pathway (Figure 4D and Table S6)Figure 4 Gene expression patterns in pseudomale formed under high temperature and normal temperature. (A) Number of DEGs shown by Venn diagram. (B) Heatmaps showing the expression of DEGs found both in C22_P vs 30dpf_F and C28_P vs 30dpf_F (red: higher expression, blue: lower expression). (C) Enriched KEGG pathways of DEGs up-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P (q < 0.05). (D) Enriched KEGG pathways of DEGs down-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P (q < 0.05), graph showing top 20 significant terms.To identify the genetic networks involved in the formation of pseudomales in C. semilaevis, a weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) was conducted on all samples. Based on the expression values of each gene, we ultimately obtained six modules, and genes within each module had highly interconnected expression patterns (Figure 5A). According to the correlation coefficients between the module and the samples, we found that the blue and yellow modules showed the highest and significant correlation with the pseudomale gonad (Pearson value >0.9). We performed KEGG enrichment analysis on the two modules, and found that the blue module had 140 genes that were significantly enriched in pathways related to signal transduction, including cellular senescence, gap junction, and calcium signaling pathway. This suggests that genes in the blue module are likely involved in sensing external high temperature and activating signals (Figure 5B). In the yellow module, 83 genes were significantly enriched in 19 pathways (p < 0.05). The enriched KEGGs included Wnt signaling pathway, hippo signaling pathway, glycosphingolipid biosynthesis-globo and isoglobo series, adherens junction, and melanogenesis (Figure 5D). The co-expression network of the blue and yellow modules was further explored by protein-protein interaction analysis. The hub gene in the blue module was leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 18 (Figure 5C). The hub genes in the yellow module were heat shock cognate 70 kDa protein-like (XP_008307673.1), elongation factor 1-alpha 1 (XP_020457373.1), and eukaryotic initiation factor 4A-II-like (XP_008332345.1) (Figure 5E).Figure 5 WGCNA and functional analysis of pseudomale-related modules. (A) The relationship between 6 modules across all samples by weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA). The color bar indicates correlation value from low (blue) to high (red). (B, D) Enriched KEGG pathways of genes in the blue module (B) and yellow module (D) (q < 0.05). (C, E) The network relationship in the blue module (C) and yellow module (E).To validate the transcriptome sequencing data, the fold changes in 9 genes including figla, foxl2, wnt5b, hspa13, hsc70-like, hsd11b1-like, hsd17b3-like, aromatase-like, and cyp11b-like were measured using qRT-PCR. Similar up- or down-regulation patterns of these genes were observed in qRT-PCR and RNA-seq results (Figure S3), although few genes showed differentiation between the values. These differentiations may be due to the different calculated methods used between RNA-seq and qPCR. In general, the validation analysis by qRT-PCR indicated the accuracy and reliability of the RNA-seq results.In the last decade, effort has been made to identify the molecular mechanism that underlies ESR in fish. High throughput sequencing, microarray profiles and genome-wide methylation analysis in zebrafish, European sea bass, and Nile tilapia have identified the role of epigenetic inheritance in ESR (Diaz and Piferrer, 2015; Sun et al., 2016; Ribas et al., 2017). A recent study in T. scripta found that epigenetic factors activate sex-related genes during male sex determination under high temperature (Ge et al., 2018). However, the relationship between high temperature and the epigenetic mechanisms, and the factors that convert external high temperature signals into internal signals to then alter the sex of genetic females to phenotypic males largely remains unclear.To further identify genes involved in ESR, we exposed C. semilaevis to high temperature conditions during early sex differentiation from 30 dpf to 3 mpf. We focused on identifying gene expression changes in the gonad of males, females and pseudomales at the undifferentiated and post-differentiated stages using transcriptomic analysis. Before sex differentiation, genetic males and females showed differences in genes related to muscle development, suggesting that the sex-related dimorphism in C. semilaevis may be traced back to the pre-sex differentiation stage. After sex differentiation, females had up-regulation of female-specific genes figla and foxl2 and down-regulation of male-specific genes dmrt1 and amh, both in normal and high temperature conditions. DEGs between female and male were enriched in KEGG pathways cell cycle, oocyte meiosis, hedgehog signaling pathway, calcium signaling pathway, neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, and pancreatic secretion. In the previous study of adult gonads of C. semilaevis, DEGs between sexes were also enriched in KEGG pathways included cell cycle, oocyte meiosis, and calcium signaling, whereas neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction and pancreatic secretion pathways were not enriched (Wang et al., 2018). Thus, these two pathways may be important during early sex differentiation. When comparing gonads of fish exposed to normal or high temperatures, 534 DEGs were found in all sexes of C. semilaevis, suggesting that there is likely a common genetic mechanism to cope with exposure to high temperature. These DEGs were enriched in the KEGG pathways nitrogen metabolism, glucagon signaling pathway, protein digestion and absorption, phototransduction, adipocytokine signaling pathway, and FoxO signaling pathway. Therefore, exposure to high temperature influenced metabolism, signal transduction, cell growth and proliferation. The results were consistent with previous studies in Oncorhynchus mykiss gairdneri and Acanthochromis polyacanthus (Narum and Campbell, 2015; Veilleux et al., 2015).In order to understand the effect of high temperature on the formation of pseudomales during sex differentiation, we compared the gene expression profiles of 30 dpf genetic females and 3 mpf pseudomales under high or normal temperature treatment. After screening by their relative expression pattern in C22_P and C28_P, the DEGs were divided into two categories: (1) 304 DEGs that were up-regulated in high temperature compared to normal temperature, and (2) 188 DEGs that were down-regulated in high temperature compared to normal temperature. The first category included several members of the heat shock protein family, including hsp70 and hsp90 sub-types. Expressions of HSP70 and HSP90 are known to change in response to changes in water temperature in several species (Palmisano et al., 2000; Kazumi, 2002; Currie SMoyes and Tufts, 2010; Fan et al., 2014). In addition, hsp70 is associated with gonad development in tilapia, where it is highly expressed in the testis during gonad differentiation, along with sox9a, gata4, and lhx6 (Tao et al., 2018). Thus, Hsp70 is a candidate sensor for high temperatures during sex differentiation for future studies. The second gene category contained hsd17b3-like, which was down-regulated under high-temperature treatment. hsd17b3 is involved in androgen metabolism through oxidation-reduction reaction (Carre et al., 1993). Reduced expression of hsd17b3 may facilitate the accumulation of testosterone, thus promoting the formation of pseudomales. These DEGs of the two categories were enriched in several KEGG pathways, including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cortisol synthesis and secretion, and steroid hormone biosynthesis. Within the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway, the vasopressin receptor gene [vasopressin V2 receptor (LOC103384583)] was significantly up-regulated in the pseudomale under high temperature, while fshr (follicle stimulating hormone receptor) was significantly down-regulated. Vasopressin is produced and released by the pituitary gland, and mediates peripheral and central physiological functions that are important for osmoregulation and reproduction. Receptors of vasopressin are up-regulated in the Thalassoma bifasciatum testis (Liu et al., 2015; Zimmermann-Peruzatto et al., 2015). fshr is expressed in the theca and granulosa cells of the ovary, and sertoli cells in the testis. It belongs to the G-protein-coupled membrane receptors superfamily and regulate gametogenesis and production of sexual steroids in teleost gonads (Shinoda et al., 2010). The neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway was also enriched in Gymnocypris przewalskii brain under high temperature, where neuroactive ligand-receptor genes exhibited sex- and tissue-specific expression patterns (Tian et al., 2019). The expression of these receptors in the gonad is likely induced by neuropeptides through the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis, which then switches on the expression of genes involved in steroid hormone synthesis.The steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway plays a critical role in sex differentiation across vertebrates (Devlin and Nagahama, 2002). In addition to hsd17b3-like (LOC103398902), aromatase-like (LOC103378914) was also found in the steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway. In teleosts, aromatase activity is correlated with sex steroid levels, converting testosterone into estrogen and thus may play a role in homeostasis of the accumulated androgen.Cortisol is a well-known hormone that is associated with stress and regulates many physiological processes. Cortisol levels are elevated in fish exposed to high temperature or high-density conditions in tilapia, zebrafish, and brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) (Delaney et al., 2005; Chadwick et al., 2015; Nadirah et al., 2017; Valdivieso et al., 2019). In addition, cortisol is related to masculinization in some fish species such as pejerrey, medaka and the Japanese flounder (Hattori et al., 2009; Hayashi et al., 2010; Yamaguchi et al., 2010). In our study, the cortisol synthesis and secretion pathway was enriched in pseudomales under the high-temperature treatment. cyp11b-like was up-regulated and hsd11b1-like was down-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P. CYP11B can catalyze the conversion of testosterone to 11β-hydroxytestosterone (precursor of 11-ketotestosterone, 11-KT), a major androgen in fish that promotes spermatogenesis (Nadirah et al., 2017). The down-regulation of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases hsd11b1-like can indicate a shift from cortisone-cortisol regeneration (Morgan et al., 2014). These expression patterns suggested that cortisol might cross-talk with steroidogenesis to mediate sex reversal under high temperature, which coincide with the study in pejerrey and medaka (Fernandino et al., 2012; Fermandino et al., 2013; Castañeda Cortés et al., 2019).WGCNA analysis gave rise to two modules, although found in one biological replicate, correlated to pseudomale formation under high temperature. These two modules were enriched in KEGG pathways that were involved in signal transduction and cell developmental processes. In particular, protein-protein network analysis of the yellow module in WGCNA revealed hsc70-like (heat shock cognate 70 kDa protein-like) as the hub gene for pseudomale formation. HSC70 is a regulator of HSF1 (heat-shock factor 1), which plays an essential role in mediating the appropriate cellular response to physiological stresses (Ahn et al., 2005). In humans, hsc70 is also a mediator of the CaM-dependent nuclear import of male-specific SRY (Kaur et al., 2013). A previous study showed that heat shock protein 70 kDa (Hsp70/Hsc70) family proteins interact with steroid hormone receptors through BAG (Bcl-2 associated athanogene), and that Bag1L can enhance the transcriptional activity of the androgen receptor (Knee et al., 2001). In our transcriptome data, bag3 (the Bcl2 associated athanogene 3) and transcript LOC103398065 (BAG family molecular chaperone regulator 4-like) were up-regulated in C28_P compared to C22_P, indicating the linkage between of the heat shock protein family and steroid hormones.Based on these findings, we propose a mechanism for how the heat signal causes sex reversal. Members of heat shock protein family may detect external high temperature. Then a series of processes including neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway, steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway, and cortisol synthesis and secretion pathway were activated. This leads to changes in the relative amount of sex steroid hormones (androgen and estrogen), promoting the development of pseudomales in C. semilaevis.The present study provides important insights into ESR induced pseudomale formation in C. semilaevis. Future studies incorporating detailed functional survey of these networks and hub genes will further improve our understanding of sex reversal under external high temperature in fish.The transcriptome data used in this study has been uploaded to NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) with accession number PRJNA576366.The collection and handling of C. semilaevis were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee at the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, and all the experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals at the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences.QW analyzed the transcriptome sequencing data and wrote the manuscript. KL and WL reared the fish. BF and ZZ completed fish sampling and SNP locus sequencing. RW finished the qRT-PCR of dmrt1 gene. LT participated in the fish sampling. QL and FP revised the manuscript. CS was in charge of the guidance and revision of this manuscript.This work was supported by National Nature Science Foundation of China (31722058, 31802275, and 31472269), National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFD0900301), the AoShan Talents Cultivation Program Supported by Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology (2017ASTCP-ES06), the Taishan Scholar Project Fund of Shandong of China to CS, the National Ten-Thousands Talents Special Support Program to CS, and the International Scientific Partnership Program ISPP at King Saud University (No. 0050).Author WL was employed by company Laizhou Mingbo Aquatic Co., Ltd. (Laizhou, China). The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fgene.2019.01128/full#supplementary-materialTable S1 | qRT-PCR primers used for validating RNA-seq data.Table S2 | Reads filtered information of each library.Table S3 | Reads mapping information from each library.Table S4 | Significantly enriched GO term of DEGs in C28_F vs C28_M.Table S5 | DEGs between pseudomale formed under high temperature and normal temperature.Table S6 | Significantly enriched KEGG terms of DEGs down-regulated in C28_P vs C22_P.Ahn, S. G., Kim, S. A., Yoon, J. H., Vacratsis, P. (2005). Heat-shock cognate 70 is required for the activation of heat-shock factor 1 in mammalian cells. Biochem. J. 392, 145–152. doi: 10.1042/BJ20050412PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarBaroiller, J. F., D'cotta, H., Bezault, E., Wessels, S., Hoerstgen-Schwark, G. (2009). Tilapia sex determination: Where temperature and genetics meet. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. Physiol. 153, 30–38. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2008.11.018PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarBolger, A. M., Lohse, M., Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarBuchfink, B., Xie, C., Huson, D. H. (2015). Fast and sensitive protein alignment using DIAMOND. Nat. Methods 12, 59–60. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3176PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarBudd, A. M., Banh, Q. Q., Domingos, J. A., Jerry, D. R. (2015). Sex control in fish: approaches, challenges and opportunities for aquaculture. J. Mar.Sci. Eng 3, 329–355. doi: 10.3390/jmse3020329CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarCarre, J. L., Quemener, E., Amet, Y., Simon, B., Berthou, F., Mangin, P., et al. (1993). Characterization and solubilization of testosterone 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in human hyperplastic prostate. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 46, 265–267. doi: 10.1016/0960-0760(93)90303-EPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarCastañeda Cortés, D. C., Arias Padilla, L. F., Langlois, V. S., Somoza, G. M., Fernandino, J. I. (2019). The central nervous system acts as a transducer of stress-induced masculinization through corticotropin-releasing hormone B. Development 146, 172866. doi: 10.1242/dev.172866CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarChadwick, J. G., Nislow, K. H., Mccormick, S. D. (2015). Thermal onset of cellular and endocrine stress responses correspond to ecological limits in brook trout, an iconic cold-water fish. Conserv. Physiol. 3, 017. doi: 10.1093/conphys/cov017CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarChen, S., Zhang, G., Shao, C., Huang, Q., Liu, G., Zhang, P., et al. (2014). Whole-genome sequence of a flatfish provides insights into ZW sex chromosome evolution and adaptation to a benthic lifestyle. Nat. Genet. 46, 253–260. doi: 10.1038/ng.2890PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarChen, Y. X., Chen, Y. S., Shi, C. M., Huang, Z. B., Zhang, Y., Li, S. K., et al. (2018). SOAPnuke: a MapReduce acceleration-supported software for integrated quality control and preprocessing of high-throughput sequencing data. Gigascience 7, 120. doi: 10.1093/gigascience/gix120CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarConover, D. O., Fleisher, M. H. (1986). Temperature-Sensitive Period of Sex Determination in the Atlantic Silverside, Menidia menidia. Can. J. Fish Aquat. Sci. 43, 514–520. doi: 10.1139/f86-061CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarCui, Y., Wang, W., Ma, L., Jie, J., Zhang, Y., Wang, H., et al. (2018). New locus reveals the genetic architecture of sex reversal in the Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Heredity (Edinb). 121, 319–326. doi: 10.1038/s41437-018-0126-6PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarCui, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, W., Wang, Q., Zhang, N., Lin, F., et al. (2017). Genome editing reveals dmrt1 as an essential male sex-determining gene in Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Sci. Rep. 7, 42213. doi: 10.1038/srep42213PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarCurrie Smoyes, C. D., Tufts, B. L. (2010). The effects of heat shock and acclimation temperature on hsp70 and hsp30 mRNA expression in rainbow trout: in vivo and in vitro comparisons. J. Fish Biol. 56, 398–408. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2000.tb02114.xCrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDelaney, M. A., Klesius, P. H., Shelby, R. A. (2005). Cortisol response of Nile tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus (L.), to temperature changes. J. Appl. Aquac 16, 95–104. doi: 10.1300/J028v16n03_06CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDesprez, D., Mélard, C. (1998). Effect of ambient water temperature on sex determinism in the blue tilapia Oreochromis aureus. Aquaculture 162, 79–84. doi: 10.1016/S0044-8486(97)00242-1CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDevlin, R. H., Nagahama, Y. (2002). Sex determination and sex differentiation in fish: an overview of genetic, physiological, and environmental influences. Aquaculture 208, 191–364. doi: 10.1016/S0044-8486(02)00057-1CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDiaz, N., Piferrer, F. (2015). Lasting effects of early exposure to temperature on the gonadal transcriptome at the time of sex differentiation in the European sea bass, a fish with mixed genetic and environmental sex determination. BMC Genomics 16, 679. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1862-0PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDiaz, N., Piferrer, F. (2017). Estrogen exposure overrides the masculinizing effect of elevated temperature by a downregulation of the key genes implicated in sexual differentiation in a fish with mixed genetic and environmental sex determination. BMC Genomics 18, 973. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4345-7PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFan, Z., You, F., Wang, L., Weng, S., Wu, Z., Hu, J., et al. (2014). Gonadal transcriptome analysis of male and female olive flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus). BioMed. Res. Int. 2014, 291067. doi: 10.1155/2014/291067PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFernandino, J. I., Hattori, R. S., Kishii, A., Strüssmann, C. A., Somoza, G. M. (2012). The cortisol and androgen pathways cross talk in high temperature-induced masculinization: The 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase as a key enzyme. Endocrinology 153, 6003–6011. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1517PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFernandino, J. I., Hattori, R. S., Moreno Acosta, O. D., Strüssmann, C. A., Somoza, G. M. (2013). Environmental stress-induced testis differentiation: Androgen as a by-product of cortisol inactivation. Gen. Comp. Endocr. 192, 36–44. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.05.024CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFernandino, J. I., Popesku, J. T., Paul-Prasanth, B., Xiong, H., Hattori, R. S., Oura, M., et al. (2011). Analysis of sexually dimorphic expression of genes at early gonadogenesis of pejerrey Odontesthes bonariensis using a heterologous microarray. Sex Dev. 5, 89–101. doi: 10.1159/000324423PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarGe, C., Ye, J., Weber, C., Sun, W., Zhang, H., Zhou, Y., et al. (2018). The histone demethylase KDM6B regulates temperature-dependent sex determination in a turtle species. Science 360, 645–648. doi: 10.1126/science.aap8328PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarGuo, L., Wang, Y., Liang, S., Lin, G., Chen, S., Yang, G. (2016). Tissue-overlapping response of half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) to thermostressing based on transcriptome profiles. Gene 586, 97–104. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.04.020PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHattori, R. S., Fernandino, J. I., Kishii, A., Kimura, H., Kinno, T., Oura, M., et al. (2009). Cortisol-induced masculinization: does thermal stress affect gonadal fate in pejerrey, a teleost fish with temperature-dependent sex determination? PloS One 4, e6548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006548PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHayashi, Y., Kobira, H., Yamaguchi, T., Shiraishi, E., Yazawa, T., Hirai, T., et al. (2010). High temperature causes masculinization of genetically female medaka by elevation of cortisol. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 77, 679–686. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21203PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHolleley, C. E., O'meally, D., Sarre, S. D., Marshall Graves, J. A., Ezaz, T., Matsubara, K., et al. (2015). Sex reversal triggers the rapid transition from genetic to temperature-dependent sex. Nature 523, 79. doi: 10.1038/nature14574PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarJiang, L., Li, H. (2017). Single locus maintains large variation of sex reversal in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). G3 (Bethesda) 7, 583. doi: 10.1534/g3.116.036822PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarJohnson, N. L., Kotz, S., Kemp, A. W. (1992). Univariate Discrete Distributions, Second Edition. New York: Wiley.Google ScholarKaur, G., Lieu, K. G., Jans, D. A. (2013). 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein hsc70 mediates calmodulin-dependent nuclear import of the sex-determining factor SRY. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 4148–4157. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.436741PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKazumi, N. (2002). The 70-kDa heat shock protein response in two intertidal sculpins, Oligocottus maculosus and O. snyderi : relationship of hsp70 and thermal tolerance. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. Physiol. 133, 79–94. doi: 10.1016/S1095-6433(02)00115-0PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKim, D., Langmead, B., Salzberg, S. L. (2015). HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. Nat. Methods 12, 357–360. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3317PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKnee, D. A., Froesch, B. A., Nuber, U., Takayama, S., Reed, J. C. (2001). Structure-function analysis of Bag1 proteins. Effects on androgen receptor transcriptional activity. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 12718–12724. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010841200PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLangfelder, P., Horvath, S. (2008). WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinf. 9, 559. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-559CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLangmead, B., Salzberg, S. L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1923PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLi, B., Dewey, C. N. (2011). RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinf. 12, 323. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-323CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLiu, H., Lamm, M. S., Rutherford, K., Black, M. A., Godwin, J. R., Gemmell, N. J. (2015). Large-scale transcriptome sequencing reveals novel expression patterns for key sex-related genes in a sex-changing fish. Biol. Sex Differ. 6, 26. doi: 10.1186/s13293-015-0044-8PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLiu, J. X., Liu, X. B., Jin, C. F., Du, X. X., He, Y., Zhang, Q. Q. (2019). Transcriptome profiling insights the feature of sex reversal induced by high temperature in tongue sole Cynoglossus semilaevis. Front. Genet. 10, 522. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00522PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLiu, Y., Chen, S. L., Gao, F. T., Meng, L., Qiao-Mu, H., Song, W. T., et al. (2014). SCAR-transformation of sex-specific SSR marker and its application in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semiliaevis). J. Agr. Biotechnol. 65, S22. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1674-7968.2014.06.015CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLove, M. I., Wolfgang, H., Simon, A. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarMarshall Graves, J. A. (2008). Weird animal genomes and the evolution of vertebrate sex and sex chromosomes. Annu. Rev. Genet. 42, 565–586. doi: 10.1146/annurev.genet.42.110807.091714PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarMorgan, S. A., Mccabe, E. L., Gathercole, L. L., Hassan-Smith, Z. K., Larner, D. P., Bujalska, I. J., et al. (2014). 11β-HSD1 is the major regulator of the tissue-specific effects of circulating glucocorticoid excess. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, E2482. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1323681111PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarNadirah, M., Ramly, H. R., Abdul Manaf, M. T., Razzak, L. A., Najiah, M. (2017). High water temperature impairs physiological responses in red hybrid tilapia: effects on cortisol and its regulation. AACL Bioflux 10, 1297–1308.Google ScholarNarum, S. R., Campbell, N. R. (2015). Transcriptomic response to heat stress among ecologically divergent populations of redband trout. BMC Genomics 16, 103. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1246-5PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarNavarro-Martin, L., Vinas, J., Ribas, L., Diaz, N., Gutierrez, A., Di Croce, L., et al. (2011). DNA methylation of the gonadal aromatase (cyp19a) promoter is involved in temperature-dependent sex ratio shifts in the European sea bass. PloS Genet. 7, e1002447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002447PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarPalmisano, A. N., Winton, J. R., Dickhoff, W. W. (2000). Tissue-specific induction of hsp90 mRNA and plasma cortisol response in Chinook salmon following heat shock, seawater challenge, and handling challenge. Mar. Biotechnol. 2, 329–338. doi: 10.1007/s101260000005PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarRibas, L., Liew, W. C., Diaz, N., Sreenivasan, R., Orban, L., Piferrer, F. (2017). Heat-induced masculinization in domesticated zebrafish is family-specific and yields a set of different gonadal transcriptomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, E941–E950. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1609411114PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarRobledo, D., Ribas, L., Cal, R., Sanchez, L., Piferrer, F., Martinez, P., et al. (2015). Gene expression analysis at the onset of sex differentiation in turbot (Scophthalmus maximus). BMC Genomics 16, 973. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2142-8PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSarre, S. D., Ezaz, T., Georges, A. (2011). Transitions between sex-determining systems in reptiles and amphibians. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 12, 391–406. doi: 10.1146/annurev-genom-082410-101518PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarShao, C., Li, Q., Chen, S., Zhang, P., Lian, J., Hu, Q., et al. (2014). Epigenetic modification and inheritance in sexual reversal of fish. Genome Res. 24, 604–615. doi: 10.1101/gr.162172.113PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarShinoda, T., Miranda, L. A., Okuma, K., Hattori, R. S., Fernandino, J. I., Yoshizaki, G., et al. (2010). Molecular cloning and expression analysis of Fshr and Lhr in relation to Fshb and Lhb subunits during the period of temperature-dependent sex determination in pejerrey Odontesthes bonariensis. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 77, 521–532. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21179PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSun, L. X., Teng, J., Zhao, Y., Li, N., Wang, H., Ji, X. S. (2018). Gonad transcriptome analysis of high-temperature-treated females and high-temperature-induced sex-reversed neomales in Nile tilapia. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19, 689. doi: 10.3390/ijms19030689CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSun, L. X., Wang, Y. Y., Zhao, Y., Wang, H., Li, N., Ji, X. S. (2016). Global DNA methylation changes in Nile tilapia gonads during high temperature-induced masculinization. PloS One 11, e0158483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158483PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarTao, W., Chen, J., Tan, D., Yang, J., Sun, L., Wei, J., et al. (2018). Transcriptome display during tilapia sex determination and differentiation as revealed by RNA-Seq analysis. BMC Genomics 19, 363. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-4756-0PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarTian, F., Liu, S., Shi, J., Qi, H., Zhao, K., Xie, B. (2019). Transcriptomic profiling reveals molecular regulation of seasonal reproduction in Tibetan highland fish, Gymnocypris przewalskii. BMC Genomics 20, 2. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-5358-6PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarValdivieso, A., Ribas, L., Piferrer, F. (2019). Ovarian transcriptomic signatures of zebrafish females resistant to different environmental perturbations. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 332, 55–68. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22848PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarVeilleux, H. D., Ryu, T., Donelson, J. M., Van Herwerden, L., Seridi, L., Ghosheh, Y., et al. (2015). Molecular processes of transgenerational acclimation to a warming ocean. Nat. Clim. Change 5, 1074. doi: 10.1038/nclimate2724CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarWang, L. K., Feng, Z. X., Wang, X., Wang, X. W., Zhang, X. G. (2010). DEGseq: an R package for identifying differentially expressed genes from RNA-seq data. Bioinformatics 26, 136–138. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp612PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarWang, N., Wang, R., Wang, R., Chen, S. (2018). Transcriptomics analysis revealing candidate networks and genes for the body size sexual dimorphism of Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Funct. Integr. Genomics 18, 327–339. doi: 10.1007/s10142-018-0595-yPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarWang, Y. Y., Sun, L. X., Zhu, J. J., Zhao, Y., Wang, H., Liu, H. J., et al. (2017). Epigenetic control of cyp19a1a expression is critical for high temperature induced Nile tilapia masculinization. J. Therm. Biol. 69, 76–84. doi: 10.1016/j.jtherbio.2017.06.006PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarYamaguchi, T., Yamaguchi, S., Hirai, T., Kitano, T. (2007). Follicle-stimulating hormone signaling and Foxl2 are involved in transcriptional regulation of aromatase gene during gonadal sex differentiation in Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 359, 935–940. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.05.208PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarYamaguchi, T., Yoshinaga, N., Yazawa, T., Gen, K., Kitano, T. (2010). Cortisol is involved in temperature-dependent sex determination in the Japanese flounder. Endocrinology. 151, 3900–3908. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0228PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarZimmermann-Peruzatto, J. M., Lazzari, V. M., De Moura, A. C., Almeida, S., Giovenardi, M. (2015). Examining the role of vasopressin in the modulation of parental and sexual behaviors. Front. Psychiatry 6, 130–130. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0228PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKeywords: transcriptome, high temperature, sex differentiation, environmental sex reversal, Cynoglossus semilaevisCitation: Wang Q, Liu K, Feng B, Zhang Z, Wang R, Tang L, Li W, Li Q, Piferrer F and Shao C (2019) Transcriptome of Gonads From High Temperature Induced Sex Reversal During Sex Determination and Differentiation in Chinese Tongue Sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis. Front. Genet. 10:1128. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01128Received: 30 May 2019; Accepted: 17 October 2019;
Published: 22 November 2019.Edited by:Reviewed by:Copyright © 2019 Wang, Liu, Feng, Zhang, Wang, Tang, Li, Li, Piferrer and Shao. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.*Correspondence: Changwei Shao, shaocw@ysfri.ac.cnQiong Wang, Yuying He and Jian LiYunji Xiu, Changwei Shao, Ying Zhu, Yangzhen Li, Tian Gan, Wenteng Xu, Francesc Piferrer and Songlin ChenNing Ma, Wenxuan Liu, Xiaolin Zhang, Xia Gao, Fengxue Yu, Weiheng Guo, Yanxin Meng, Ping Gao, Jin Zhou, Meina Yuan, Yingjun Mi, Lei Zhang, Sufen Qi, Lu Li, Luyao Wang, Qiao Su, Lei Yang and Dianwu LiuAndrew Foote, David Simma, Mehar Khatkar, Herman Raadsma, Jarrod Guppy, Greg Coman, Erika Giardina, Dean Jerry, Kyall Zenger and Nick WadeSaskia Meier, Paula Korkuć, Danny Arends and Gudrun A. BrockmannImpact Factor 3.258 | CiteScore 2.7
More on impact ›Genetic Dissection of Important Traits in Aquaculture: Genome-scale Tools Development, Trait Localization and Regulatory Mechanism Exploration View all 38 ArticlesUniversity of Santiago de Compostela, SpainCONICET Instituto Tecnológico de Chascomús (INTECH), ArgentinaInstitute of Marine Research, Higher Council for Scientific Research (CSIC), SpainThe editor and reviewers' affiliations are the latest provided on their Loop research profiles and may not reflect their situation at the time of review.Suggest a Research Topic >Sex reversal induced by temperature change is a common feature in fish. Usually, the sex ratio shift occurs when temperature deviates too much from normal during embryogenesis or sex differentiation stages. Despite decades of work, the mechanism of how temperature functions during early development and sex reversal remains mysterious. In this study, we used Chinese tongue sole as a model to identify features from gonad transcriptomic and epigenetic mechanisms involved in temperature induced masculinization. Some of genetic females reversed to pseudomales after high temperature treatment which caused the sex ratio imbalance. RNA-seq data showed that the expression profiles of females and males were significantly different, and set of genes showed sexually dimorphic expression. The general transcriptomic feature of pesudomales was similar with males, but the genes involved in spermatogenesis and energy metabolism were differentially expressed. In gonads, the methylation level of cyp19a1a promoter was higher in females than in males and pseudomales. Furthermore, high-temperature treatment increased the cyp19a1a promoter methylation levels of females. We observed a significant negative correlation between methylation levels and expression of cyp19ala. In vitro study showed that CpG within the cAMP response element (CRE) of the cyp19a1a promoter was hypermethylated, and DNA methylation decreased the basal and forskolin-induced activities of cyp19a1a promoter. These results suggested that epigenetic change, i.e., DNA methylation, which regulate the expression of cyp19a1a might be the mechanism for the temperature induced masculinization in tongue sole. It may be a common mechanism in teleost that can be induced sex reversal by temperature.The types of sex determination are diversified in teleost. Three main types of primary sex determination have been described in gonochoristic species: genotypic sex determination (GSD), temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) and a combination of both (GSD ++ TSD) (Ospina-Álvarez and Piferrer, 2008; Yamamoto et al., 2014). The sex of fish had strong uncertainty in the development process. In addition to genetic information, environmental factors could influence the sex determination, such as temperature. Apart from fish, the temperature irreversibly determining gonadal sex has been well established in reptiles and amphibians (Sarre et al., 2011; Flament, 2016). Since firstly described in Menidia menidia (Conover and Kynard, 1981), this phenomenon had been widely observed in fish, which showed that sex ratio would become unbalanced if the fish experienced high temperature during thermosensitive period (TSP). The imbalance of sex ratio was caused by sex reversal. Usually, it can be divided into three types: (1) high temperature has positive correlation with the proportion of males. (2) High temperature induces females, and has a negative correlation with males. (3) Both low temperature and high temperature increase the proportion of males (Baroiller and D’Cotta, 2001; Devlin and Nagahama, 2002; Ospina-Álvarez and Piferrer, 2008).To verify the molecular mechanism of temperature effects (TE), a series of exploration was carried out. Steroid hormone, glucocorticoid, and epigenetic modification have been reported to be related to sex reversal and played critical roles during sex differentiation in TSD (Hattori et al., 2009; Lance, 2009; Nakamura, 2010; Yoshinaga et al., 2010; Navarro-Martín et al., 2011; Fernandino et al., 2012, 2013; Kitano et al., 2012; Piferrer, 2013; Zhang et al., 2013). Besides, it was discovered that intron retention of JARID2 and JMJD3 genes in Pogona vitticeps could mediate sex-reversed females (Deveson et al., 2017). Androgen-to-estrogen ratio determined whether an undifferentiated gonad differentiated into a testis or ovary in non-mammalian vertebrates (Simpson et al., 1994). The regulation of steroid ratio depended on the activity of gonadal aromatase, the product of cyp19a1a, which converts androgens into estrogens irreversibly (Simpson et al., 1994). In reptiles, up-regulating or down-regulating cyp19a1a could alter gonad phenotype. The expression level of gonadal cyp19a1a was associated with TSD in Trachemys scripta and Alligator mississippiensis (Pieau and Dorizzi, 2004; Matsumoto et al., 2016). In teleost, it has been confirmed that high temperature induced masculinization is related to the methylation level of cyp19a1a promoter in Dicentrarchus labrax. Methylation modification in the promoter region could suppress the binding of transcription factors to the corresponding sites (SF-1, FOXL2, and CREB) resulting in the change of expression (Navarro-Martín et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2013). Similar conclusions were observed in Oreochromis niloticus and Oncorhynchus mykiss (Valdivia et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2017). Meanwhile, FOXL2 and SOX9, which showed dimorphic DNA methylation patterning were also considered as the candidate genes in A. mississippiensis and Paralichthys olivaceus (Parrott et al., 2014; Si et al., 2016). Other factors have also been suggested to play a role in GSD + TE, such as heat shock proteins (HSPs), transient receptor potential channels (TRPs), cold inducible RNA binding proteins (CIRBPs), and microRNAs (Kohno et al., 2010; Rhen and Schroeder, 2010; Bizuayehu et al., 2015; Czerwinski et al., 2016; Schroeder et al., 2016).The effect of temperature on the sex differentiation can be profound and far-reaching, and needs comprehensive studies to fully understand the molecular mechanisms. Chinese tongue sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis, is a GSD + TSD sex determination teleost with ZZ/ZW sex chromosomes (Zhou et al., 2005). Female-specific DNA sequences had been identified in C. semilaevis, which could be used for distinguishing genetic female and male (Wang et al., 2009, 2013). Therefore, C. semilaevis is a unique powerful model to explore molecular events associated with GSD + TSD. In previous study, it was reported that epigenetic modification was involved in sex reversal of C. semilaevis by BS-seq and RNA-seq, and transgenerational epigenetic inheritance was observed in offspring generated by sex reversal individuals (Chen et al., 2014; Shao et al., 2014). We aimed to filter genes related to sex differentiation, explore the relationship of expression level and methylation modification, and analyze whether methylation could regulate the binding of transcription factor. In this study, the genetic female individuals that inversed to phenotypic male individuals are defined as pseudomales. These pseudomales are distinguished from high temperature treatment groups using female-specific markers. RNA-seq was performed on the gonads of females, males, and pseudomales. The whole expression profiles were investigated, and candidate genes involved in sexual gonad development were identified. The methylation patterns of the putative genes were also analyzed. The interaction of upstream regulatory sequence and the corresponding transcription factors was verified by dual-luciferase reporter system. These findings helped us to understand the genetic epigenetic programing driving vertebrate GSD + TE and provide insight for future investigations aimed at clarifying the mechanisms controlling sex differentiation and sex reversal.Fish and embryos were collected from Yellow Sea Aquatic Product Co. Ltd., Shandong, China. Embryos were incubated at 20°C, the natural temperature for C. semilaevis spawning, fertilization and hatching. For this study, a batch of embryos collected from three pairs of parents was used. After hatching the fry were reared at ambient temperature (20–22°C). The juveniles at 25 days post fertilization (dpf) with total length (TL) of 13 ± 2 mm were separated into two groups. One group (n = 3000) was reared at ambient temperature throughout the TSP as control group (low temperature group, LT). The other group (n = 3000) was exposed at 28°C during the entire TSP and as the high-temperature group (high temperature group, HT). The temperature was increased to 28°C at a rate of 0.5°C/day, and then maintained for 100 days, until 125 dpf (Figure 1). Then the water was recovered to ambient temperature to follow the natural fluctuations until the end of the study, when the fish were 300 days old. The proportion of phenotypic males and females was counted by gonad biopsy and section confirmation in LT group and HT group, respectively. From these phenotypic males genetic males and pseudomales were identified using female-specific markers (Wang et al., 2009). The survival rate was also calculated for both of the groups.Figure 1. Thermal protocols applied in the present study. The experimental groups were: control group, LT, 20°C from 25 to 100 dpf, thereafter following the natural fluctuation (blue line). High-temperature group, HT, 28°C from 25 to 100 dpf, throughout the whole TSP (red line). The major events related to gonad formation and sex differentiation are also indicated.At 300 dpf, fish were sacrificed and gonadal samples were collected. For each fish, one gonad was processed for histological identification of phenotypic gender and DNA/RNA extraction. Gonads were fixed in 4% PFA in PBS, embedded in paraffin, cut at 7 μm thickness and stained with haematoxylin-eosin. Meanwhile, the other gonad was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for RNA-seq analysis. Muscle tissues were collected to extract DNA for individual sexing and methylation analysis. The methylation level of muscle was selected as control.Gonads from nine individuals including three biological replicates of females (FO), males (MT), and pseudomales (PMT) were selected for RNA-seq analysis. Total RNA was extracted using Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, United States) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, treated with RNase-free DNase I (TaKaRa, Dalian, China) to degrade genomic DNA, and then frozen at -80°C. RNAclean Kit was applied to remove proteins. The quality and quantity were evaluated via 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis and spectrophotometry using NanoPhotometer Pearl (Implen GmbH, Munich, Germany) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States).The nine RNA-seq libraries were constructed with Illumina TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction. Then the libraries were subjected to paired-end sequencing of 125 bp on the Illumina HiSeq 2000.Raw reads generated from the Illumina sequencing platform were cleaned by removing adaptors and low quality sequences using FastQC. The cleaned reads of each sample were mapped to the reference genome (Chen et al., 2014) by TopHat with default parameters (Kim and Salzberg, 2011). Then the mapping files were analyzed using Cufflinks to assemble the reads into transcripts for each dataset (Roberts et al., 2011). Complete transcripts were obtained by merging the assemblies of all datasets using Cuffmerge.All the expressed genes were aligned to databases for homology annotation, including non-redundant protein databases (NR), Swiss-Prot, Gene Ontology (GO), eukaryotic Orthologs Groups (KOG), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) by BlastX with e-value of 1e-5 (Kanehisa et al., 2008).FPKM were used to select the DEGs. The FPKM was calculated by Cuffdiff (Trapnell et al., 2012). To identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) among female, male and pseudomale gonads, we set the following standards: genes with an adjusted log2FoldChange ≥ 2 or log2FoldChange ≤-2, and P < 0.01 were considered as DEGs. The DEGs were then enriched by GO terms and KEGG categories using DAVID (Huang et al., 2008). The visualization of global similarities and differences of expression profiles of all individuals was accomplished by principle component analysis (PCA), MA plot and heatmap. These analysis were completed with R package.A total of ten DEGs (Sox9, GATA4, Dmrt1, AMH, HSD11b2, cyp19a1a, esr1, topaz1, GATA6, Sox3) were selected for qRT-PCR validation. Specific primer pairs were designed by IDT. qRT-PCR was performed in a 20 μg solution containing 10 ng of template cDNA and SYBR qPCR SuperMix (Novoprotein, Shanghai, China) by using LightCycler 480 (Roche, Forrentrasse, Switzerland) at 95°C for 5 min pre-incubation, followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 45 s. The relative quantities of the target genes expressed as fold variation over GAPDH were calculated using the 2-ΔΔCt comparative Ct method. qRT-PCR data were statistically analyzed using one-way ANOVA followed by LSD test using SPSS 20.0. P < 0.05 indicated statistical significance.Methylation sites were prediction and BSP primers design in promoter were performed by Methprimer. Gonad and muscle tissues of females, males and pesudomales (six individuals each) were used to extract genomic DNA. The DNA samples from the same tissue of the same gender were mixed. The mixed DNA was modified using the EZ DNA Methylation-Gold Kit (ZYMO Research). The primers M-cyp19a1a-Fw1/Rv1 and M-cyp19a1a-Fw2/Rv2 were used for methylation-specific PCR. Eight positive clones were sequenced for each group. Site-specific methylation measurements were analyzed using BiQ-Analyzer.A pGL3-Cyp19a1a-Luc reporter vector was constructed by inserting the cyp19ala promoter fragment into the pGL3-basic vector (Promega, Madison, WI, United States) between SacI and XhoI sites. The promoter was a 1969 bp fragment amplified from genomic DNA with primers pGL3-cyp19a1a-Fw/Rv (Supplementary Table S3). The pGL3-cyp19a1a promoter vector was cytosine-methylated using M. SssI methylase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, United States) (M-cyp19a1a-Luc) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. It could methylate all cytosine residues within the double-stranded dinucleotide recognition sequence. The methylation status of the vector was checked by HhaI, which only digested methylated DNA.The HEK 293T cell line was used for transfection with unmethylated and methylated plasmids. Before the experiment, a total of 5 × 105 cells were seeded into 24-well plates and cultured for 24 h. Then the plasmids were transfected into HEK 293T cells by LipofectamineTM 3000 Transfection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, United States) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. At 48 h after transfection, cells were washed with PBS and analyzed for Luc activity using the luciferase assay system (Promega, Madison, WI, United States). Forskolin (5 μM), the activation of cAMP, which binds to CREB site, was added 10 h before the end of cell culture.The survival rates and proportion of females and males were counted both in LT group and HT group after treatment. No difference was found between the two groups in survival rate (χ2 = 0.190, P = 0.663). The survival rates were 62.97 and 59.80% in LT group and HT group (Figure 2E). The proportion of females and males as detected by biopsy and gonad tissue sectioning was 56.58 and 43.53% in LT group (Figures 2A–C), and 36.51 and 63.49% in HT group (Figure 2D), respectively. The proportion of males was significantly increased more than 20% after treatment with high temperature during TSP (χ2 = 7.624, P = 0.006). These data indicated that masculinization was induced in genetic females following high temperature treatment.Figure 2. The identification of phenotype and genotype by and PCR. (A–C) Identification of phenotype, the gonadal histology of female, male and pseudomale. (D) The sexual ratio of LT and HT groups. (E) The survival rate of LT and HT group. (F) The identification of genotype by female-specific fragment.The genotypic and phenotypic sex of these individuals were distinguished by molecular marker and tissue section (Figure 2F). A total nine cDNA libraries were sequenced on the Illumina platform, generating 655,677,682 raw reads, encompassing about 30 Gb of sequence. Valid ratio and GC content of each cDNA library were shown in Table 1. Approximately 80.1% of reads exhibited significant hits to the genome. The transcriptome data obtained from the samples has been uploaded to NCBI SRA site, with accession numbers of PRJNA480118 (SAMN09628942, SAMN09628943, SAMN09628989, SAMN09628990, SAMN096 28991, SAMN09628992, SAMN09628993, SAMN09628994, and SAMN09628995).Table 1. Summary statistics of gonad transcriptome sequencing data.Principle component analysis analysis were conducted to detect the global similarities and differences expression profiles among FO, MT, and PMT. It displayed that ovary (FO) replicates clustered closely in a region, and testis (MT and PMT) replicates clustered into another region. The MT and PMT replicates clustered together (Figure 3B). These results demonstrated that the expression patterns of phenotypic females and males was significantly different. However, the expression profiles showed more similarity between males and pseudomales. Although females and pseudomales retained the same genotype, the expression profiles were quite different. Males and pseudomales possessed different sex chromosomes, but the expression patterns were similar.Figure 3. The expression profiles and DEGs among females, males and pseudomales in gonads. (A) Heatmap analysis of hierarchical clustering of DEGs in females (FO1, FO2, FO3), males (MT1, MT2, MT3), and pseudomales (PMT1, PMT2, PMT3). Each column represented an individual, and each row represented a gene. The FPKM was transformed by log10. Red color represented the high expressed genes, and green color represented the low expressed genes. (B) PCA plot of specimens. (C) Venn diagram shown the numbers of expressed genes and DEGs in FO, MT and PTM.Among the DEGs, 5851 genes were significantly differentially expressed in FO vs. MT. 5611 genes were found differentially expressed in FO vs. PMT. Between MT vs. PMT, only 426 genes were identified as DEGs (Figure 3C and Supplementary Table S1). Regarding the functions of the DEGs, a large number of genes related to gonad development and sex differentiation were identified, which include Dmrt1, Dmrt3, HSD3b1, AMH, HSD3b7, esr1, SOX9, GATA4, GATA6, cyp19a, AMHR2 (Table 1). The heatmap of hierarchical clustering of DEGs was generated to visualize the expression patterns. The profile of phenotypic female was obviously different with all phenotypic male. The expression pattern of pseudomale was prone to that of male (Figure 3A).After filtration, the DEGs were applied to perform GO analysis and KEGG enrichment. All the DEGs were mapped to GO terms and compared with the background of the whole transcriptome. They were significantly enriched in several GO terms in biological process, cellular component and molecular function (Supplementary Table S2). The results of enrichment were as follow: (1) In DEGs of FO vs. MT, the terms related to sexual differentiation and the regulation of reproduction were enriched, including sperm motility, 3-beta-hydroxy-delta5-steroid dehydrogenase activity and steroid hormone receptor activity. Besides, the terms about immune response were enriched (Figure 4A). (2) In FO vs. PMT, the terms of steroid hormone and helicase activity were detected, such as steroid hormone receptor activity and helicase activity (Figure 4B). They were also involved in reproduction and sexual differentiation and development. (3) In MT vs. PMT, it was found that some terms related to reproduction and the generation and development of testis was detected, comprising of male gamete generation, spermatogenesis, spermatid development, spermatid differentiation, and sterol transport (Figure 4C). Interestingly, the terms about sperm generation and differentiation were detected, including male gamete generation, spermatogenesis and spermatid differentiation and development. Surprisingly, the GO terms about energy metabolism were enriched, including UTP metabolic process, CTP metabolic process, CTP biosynthetic process, GTP metabolic process (Figure 4C and Supplementary Table S2). These terms are involved in meiosis and gamete generation, and may influence sperm activity. Meanwhile, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed. A total of 44 KEGG terms were significantly enriched. The enriched signal pathways were similar in FO vs. MT and FO vs. PMT, including ribosome biogenesis, cell adhesion and metabolism and biosynthesis. Only one signal pathway involved in metabolism was enriched, phosphatidylinositol signaling system (Figure 5).Figure 4. GO enrichment analysis of DEGs. DEGs were annotated to different GO terms in biological process, molecular function, and cellular component. (A) GO enrichment analysis of DEGs in FO vs MT. (B) GO enrichment analysis of DEGs in FO vs PMT. (C) GO enrichment analysis of DEGs in MT vs PMT.Figure 5. KEGG enrichment analysis of DEGs.To identify genes involved in reproduction, including gonad development, gametogenesis and steroid biosynthesis in C. semilaevis, three strategies were used. (1) Sex-related genes were retrieved from the enriched GO terms, related to reproduction and steroid. (2) The DEGs were filtered by a set of key words that had been reported in other teleost, including gonad, sex, oocyte, meiosis, steroid, reproduction, and morphogenesis (Fan et al., 2014; Shao et al., 2014; Robledo et al., 2015). (3) Part genes were chosen from sex-related KEGG pathways. In accordance with these strategies, a set of potential candidate genes were obtained, and qRT-PCR validation were conducted (Table 2). Additionally, the DEGs of MT vs. PMT were analyzed independently, and the genes involved in spermatogenesis, gamete generation and development and energy metabolism were selected (Table 3).Table 2. DEGs associated with sex differentiation and gonad development in FO vs. MT and FO vs. PMT.Table 3. DEGs associated with spermatogenesis and energy metabolism in MT vs. PMT.The expression patterns of ten DEGs (Sox9, GATA4, Dmrt1, AMH, HSD11b2, cyp19a1a, esr1, topaz1, GATA6, Sox3) associated with gonad development or steroid biosynthesis were selected for qRT-PCR validation. All the genes displayed consistent expression patterns both in qRT-PCR and RNA-seq (Figure 6). The Pearson correlation coefficient analysis exhibited correlation between qRT-PCR assay and RNA-seq data (R = 0.394, P = 0.031), indicating the accuracy and reliability of RNA-seq.Figure 6. Verification of the expression patterns both in qRT-PCR and RNA-seq. The data was shown as mean ± SD (n = 6). Groups with different letters were significantly different (P < 0.05).The DEGs analysis, qRT-PCR validation as well as the results of previous study (Shao et al., 2014), indicated that cyp19a1a played an essential role in sex differentiation, and sex reversal induced by temperature in C. semilaevis. It was regarded that proper expression of cyp19a1a is essential for maintaining the ratio of androgen and estrogen. The balance might be destroyed by expression changes of cyp19a1a mediated by abnormal environmental temperature. Epigenetic modification is considered as one of the factors that might affect cyp19a1a expression level.To test our hypothesis, DNA methylation of cyp19a1a promoter in gonad and muscle was examined. The CpG dinucleotides ∼2000 bp upstream of the transcription start site were selected, which had two approximate clusters: 10 CpGs in the distal promoter region (-1857 to -1718, designated as region I) and 6 CpGs in the proximal promoter region (-357 to -220, designated as region II). No difference in the methylation level was detected in the muscle tissue among females, males and pseudomales (Figure 7B). In the gonads, however, significant higher methylation levels were observed in male and pseudomale testis than in the female ovaries (Figure 7A). It was important to notice that high temperature-induced sex reversal from females to pseudomales is accompanied by the significant elevation of methylation level of gonadal cyp19a1a promoter.Figure 7. C. semilaevis cyp19a1a promoter methylation levels and correlation with gonad gene expression according to sex and temperature treatment. (A) The methylation patterns of C. semilaevis cyp19a1a promoter in gonads. (B) The methylation patterns of C. semilaevis cyp19a1a promoter in muscle. Numbers indicated CpG positions with respect to the transcription starting site. Open and filled circles denoted unmethylated or methylated positions, respectively, while no circles denoted unknown methylation status due to sequencing problems. Eight to ten clones per fish were analyzed. (C) The relative expression level of C. semilaevis cyp19a1a in gonads by qRT-PCR. The data was shown as mean ± SD (n = 6). Groups with different letters were significantly different (P < 0.05).To investigate if the promoter methylation would regulate the expression of cyp19a1a, qRT-PCR was performed in gonads of three groups. The expression level in females from LT and HT groups was similar, which were significantly higher (P < 0.05) than that in males (both LT and HT groups) as well as pseudomales, No expressional difference was observed between males and pseudomales (P > 0.05) (Figure 7C). Based on the methylation and expression data, we conclude that the expression level of cyp19ala showed highly negative correlation with the promoter methylation levels in gonads.However, it was not the same case in the muscle tissue, where the cyp19a1a was only basally expressed. The average methylation levels of cyp19a1a promoter were similar and high in all, regardless of temperature treatment (Figure 7B). Two-way ANOVA analysis showed absolutely no differences among three groups in the cyp19a1a promoter methylation level in terms of temperature treatment (P > 0.05) and sex (P > 0.05). Either, no significant interaction between the two factors was found (P > 0.05).Transcription factor binding sites in cyp19a1a promoter were predicted using MatInspector. Two binding sites for CREB were found in the CpGs in position -1818 and -226, respectively (Figure 8B). In vitro study demonstrated that the methylation could decrease the activity of cyp19a1a promoter. The activity of unmethylated promoter could be significantly induced by forskolin stimulation. In contrast, no significantly change was observed in methylated promoter (Figure 8A).Figure 8. The effect of DNA methylation of cyp19a1a promoter on cAMP-stimulated activities. Unmethylated and methylated reporter plasmids were transfected to HEK 293T cells. Luciferase activities were measured 48 h after transfection. Fold change was calculated, and cyp19a1a-Luc group was used as control. (A) The CREB mediated stimulation of cyp19a1a promoter activities by forkolin in HEK 293T cells. (B) The location of CG sites and CREB sites in two approximate clusters of cyp19a1a promoter. The data was shown as mean ± SD (n = 3). ∗∗P < 0.01 represented significantly different.Since the initial discovery of vertebrate GSD + TE, the mechanism by which temperature exerts its influence on sex determination has been extensively investigated (Ferguson and Joanen, 1982; Rhen and Schroeder, 2010; Czerwinski et al., 2016; Schroeder et al., 2016; Yatsu et al., 2016). Sex reversal can be induced when the temperature achieved a threshold, and cause sex ratio change. The sex of embryos, larva or juveniles can be reversed completely or partly under a threshold temperature in reptiles and teleost (Ferguson and Joanen, 1982; Strüssmann et al., 1996; Hattori et al., 2013; Czerwinski et al., 2016). The pseudomales have the same chromosome complement with females, but the phenotype is completely different (Hu et al., 2014). Usually, temperature exerts its influence at TSP of embryo, larva or juvenile development, when the individuals remain sexually flexible (Navarro-Martín et al., 2011; Holleley et al., 2015).In this study, a teleost, C. semilaevis, sensitive to temperature was used. We demonstrated the significant imbalance of sex ratio and survival rate after high temperature treatment in TSP. The proportion of males was about 20% higher in HT group, indicating masculinization was induced by high temperature. This phenomenon have also been reported in M. menidia, D. labrax, O. niloticus, and O. mykiss (Conover and Kynard, 1981; Navarro-Martín et al., 2011; Valdivia et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2017). Interestingly, only part of the females were easy to be induced sex reversal. In a recent study, a SNP (A/T) of FBXL17 had large controlling effect on sex reversal in C. semilaevis, and ZAW genotype would never reverse into phenotypic males, while those with ZTW genotypes would sometimes undergo sex reversal (Jiang and Li, 2017). Based on these results, we speculated that some mutation might cause the females to be sensitive to temperature, and sex reversal emerged when the temperature exceeded threshold.To explore the different expression profiling of female, male and pseudomale, RNA-seq was performed. A lot of GO terms involved in reproduction and steroid biosynthesis were identified by DEGs and enrichment analysis. Interestingly, some GO terms related to immune responses were also enriched. Similar results were displayed in Pogona vitticeps, in which the expression levels of prominent immune genes were significantly lower in pseudomales than in females and males. Further, canonical stress-related GO terms were enriched, including defense response, response to biotic stimuli (Deveson et al., 2017). It has been known that immune system was intertwined with stress. Meanwhile, evidences showed that stress and sex were connected in vertebrates. In Amphiprion akallopisos and Odontesthes bonariensis, cortisol was considered the regulator of sex change in response to environmental or social stress (Hattori et al., 2009; Yoshinaga et al., 2010; Fernandino et al., 2012, 2013; Kitano et al., 2012; Todd et al., 2016). In reptiles, POMC and corticosterone-mediated stress was observed in sex-reversed individuals (Deveson et al., 2017). In birds and rats, elevated maternal corticosterone and ACTH skewed the sex ratio of offspring (Barbazanges et al., 1996; Pike and Petrie, 2006). In human, evidence indicated that maternal stress could enhance the circulation of corticosterone and affect neuroendocrine system. These stresses had long-lasting effects on offspring morphology, behavior, physiology, and phenotype, which could cause the imbalance of sex ratio (Obel et al., 2007; Navara, 2010; Schnettler and Klüsener, 2014; van den Heuvel et al., 2018). According to a series of studies, we speculated that the C. semilaevis larva was stressed by high temperature, and immune response was activated. Then, these responses influenced endocrine system, which caused the up-regulation or down-regulation of cortisol. The biosynthesis and secretion of steroid were interfered, which leaded to sex reversal under the stress of high temperature treatment. Till now, the evidence has not been adequate, so the interaction of stress and endocrine and specific mechanism need further study.A series of evidences of environmental influences on phenotype plasticity in vertebrate mediated by epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone deacetylation has been obtained (Reik et al., 2001; Jaenisch and Bird, 2003). Epigenetic regulation can inhibit or stimulate gene transcription, which alters gene expression from the same genetic blueprint and thus affects development and differentiation (Rottach et al., 2009). In previous studies, whole-genome methylation has been found to be involved in sex-induced by high temperature in C. semilaevis, and methylation modification in sex-reversed males was inherited. Besides, dosage of Z chromosomal region was related to sex reversal in C. semilaevis (Chen et al., 2014; Shao et al., 2014). However, it was found higher levels of methylation of cyp19a1a and also higher levels in gene expression of cyp19a1a (Shao et al., 2014). In the present study, we found that the methylation level of C. semilaevis cyp19a1a promoter was significantly higher in males than in females. Importantly, the methylation profiles of pseudomales were similar with males, but absolutely different from females, although pseudomales had the same genotype (ZW) with females. Based on the methylation and expression data, we concluded that the expression level of cyp19a1a showed highly negative correlation with the promoter methylation levels in ovaries and testes. In Oryzias latipes, DNA methylation of cyp19a1a promoter was reported to be related to sex differentiation (Contractor et al., 2004). The methylation levels were twice in males compared with females in D. labrax gonads (Navarro-Martín et al., 2011). Besides, the allied discoveries was also observed in O. niloticus and P. olivaceus (Fan et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017). Cyp19a1a played important roles in sex differentiation by regulating estrogen synthesis. In C. semilaevis, females and pseudomales had the same genetic background (ZW), but different DNA methylation and expression levels of cyp19ala. Epigenetic modification caused by high temperature might transform the topology of DNA and block the binding of transcription factor, which could change the expression of cyp19a1a. In vitro study demonstrated that the methylation of -1818 and -226 sites in cyp19a1a promoter inhibited the binding of transcription factor CREB and suppressed the promoter activity, which could regulate the expression level of cyp19a1a. Thus, our results clearly showed that epigenetic modification, most likely DNA methylation, regulated the expression of gonadal cyp19a1a, which then mediated sex differentiation.Interestingly, a lot of DEGs between males and pseudomales were enriched to GO terms involved in spermatogenesis, including spermatogenesis, male genitalia development, male gamete generation, spermatid development, and spermatid differentiation. Both males and pseudomales generate sperms, but the process seemed to be significantly different. In males, only Z type sperms were generated, but both Z type and W type sperms were generated theoretically in pseudomales. The generation of different types of sperm might influence spermatogenesis and spermatid differentiation and development. Surprisingly, GO terms related to energy metabolism such as UTP, GTP, and CTP biosynthetic process and metabolic process were also enriched in DEGs between males and pseudomales. Energy metabolism could affect the sperm vitality. The results implied the quality of sperm generated from males and pseudomales might be significantly different. In theory, super female (WW) individuals could be generated by W type sperm fertilized with W type eggs. However, super females were never observed in the larval stage in our lab produced by pseudomales (unpublished data). These lines of evidence suggest that W type sperm generated from pseudomale might have weak vitality. Pseudomales might unable to generate function W type sperms or the WW embryos could not develop normally to larva (Figure 9).Figure 9. The possible diagram of generating sperm and reproducing next generation in pesudomales and normal males.In conclusion, we demonstrated that high temperature could induce masculinization in C. semilaevis. The expression patterns of pseudomales was similar to males, but the genes involved in spermatogenesis and energy metabolism were differentially expressed. Besides, high-temperature treatment could change the epigenetic modification of cyp19a1a promoter, leading to DNA methylation level increase in pseudomales, which results in the decrease of cyp19a1a expression. There was a negative correlation between methylation levels and expression of cyp19ala. Thus the epigenetic regulation of cyp19a1a might play an essential role in the sex reversal induced by high temperature in C. semilaevis.This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the Administration of Affairs Concerning Experimental Animals. The protocol was approved by the College of Marine Life, Ocean University of China.JL, XL, CJ, and XD performed the experiments and analyzed the data. JL and YH prepared the figures and wrote the manuscript. QZ designed the experiments.This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31802327), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFD0900601), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2017M622282).The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fgene.2019.00522/full#supplementary-materialTABLE S1 | DEGs in FO vs. MT, FO vs. PMT, and MT vs. PMT.TABLE S2 | GO terms in biological process, cellular component, and molecular function levels.TABLE S3 | List of primer sequences used in the study.Barbazanges, A., Piazza, P. V., Le Moal, M., and Maccari, S. (1996). Maternal glucocorticoid secretion mediates long-term effects of prenatal stress. J. Neurosci. 16, 3943–3949.Google ScholarBaroiller, J. F., and D’Cotta, H. (2001). Environment and sex determination in farmed fish. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 130, 399–409.Google ScholarBizuayehu, T. T., Johansen, S. D., Puvanendran, V., Toften, H., and Babiak, I. (2015). Temperature during early development has long-term effects on microRNA expression in Atlantic cod. BMC Genomics 16:305. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1503-7PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarChen, S., Zhang, G., Shao, C., Huang, Q., Liu, G., Zhang, P., et al. (2014). Whole-genome sequence of a flatfish provides insights into ZW sex chromosome evolution and adaptation to a benthic lifestyle. Nat. Genet. 46, 253–260. doi: 10.1038/ng.2890PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarConover, D. O., and Kynard, B. E. (1981). Environmental sex determination: interaction of temperature and genotype in a fish. Science 213, 577–579.PubMed Abstract | Google ScholarContractor, R. G., Foran, C. M., Li, S., and Willett, K. L. (2004). Evidence of gender- and tissue-specific promoter methylation and the potential for ethinylestradiol-induced changes in japanese medaka (Oryzias Latipes) estrogen receptor and aromatase genes. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A 67, 1–22.PubMed Abstract | Google ScholarCzerwinski, M., Natarajan, A., Barske, L., Looger, L. L., and Capel, B. (2016). A timecourse analysis of systemic and gonadal effects of temperature on sexual development of the red-eared slider turtle Trachemys scripta elegans. Dev. Biol. 420, 166–177. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.09.018PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDeveson, I. W., Holleley, C. E., Blackburn, J., Marshall Graves, J. A., Mattick, J. S., Waters, P. D., et al. (2017). Differential intron retention in Jumonji chromatin modifier genes is implicated in reptile temperature-dependent sex determination. Sci. Adv. 3:e1700731. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1700731PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarDevlin, R. H., and Nagahama, Y. (2002). Sex determination and sex differentiation in fish: an overview of genetic, physiological, and environmental influences. Aquaculture 208, 191–364.Google ScholarFan, Z., You, F., Wang, L., Weng, S., Wu, Z., Hu, J., et al. (2014). Gonadal transcriptome analysis of male and female olive flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus). BioMed. Res. Int. 2014, 291067–291067.Google ScholarFan, Z., Zou, Y., Jiao, S., Tan, X., Wu, Z., Liang, D., et al. (2017). Significant association of cyp19a promoter methylation with environmental factors and gonadal differentiation in olive flounder Paralichthys olivaceus. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. Physiol. 208, 70–79. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.02.017PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFerguson, M. W. J., and Joanen, T. (1982). Temperature of egg incubation determines sex in Alligator mississippiensis. Nature 296, 850–853.Google ScholarFernandino, J. I., Hattori, R. S., Moreno Acosta, O. D., Strüssmann, C. A., and Somoza, G. M. (2013). Environmental stress-induced testis differentiation: androgen as a by-product of cortisol inactivation. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 192, 36–44. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.05.024PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFernandino, J. I., Somoza, G. M., Kishii, A., Strüssmann, C. A., and Hattori, R. S. (2012). The Cortisol and androgen pathways cross talk in high temperature-induced masculinization: the 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase as a key enzyme. Endocrinology 153, 6003–6011. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1517PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarFlament, S. (2016). Sex reversal in amphibians. Sex. Dev. 10, 267–278. doi: 10.1159/000448797PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHattori, R. S., Fernandino, J. I., Kishii, A., Kimura, H., Kinno, T., Oura, M., et al. (2009). Cortisol-induced masculinization: does thermal stress affect gonadal fate in pejerrey, a teleost fish with temperature-dependent sex determination? PLoS One 4:e6548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006548PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHattori, R. S., Strüssmann, C. A., Fernandino, J. I., and Somoza, G. M. (2013). Genotypic sex determination in teleosts: insights from the testis-determining amhy gene. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 192, 55–59. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.03.019PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHolleley, C. E., O’Meally, D., Sarre, S. D., Marshall Graves, J. A., Ezaz, T., Matsubara, K., et al. (2015). Sex reversal triggers the rapid transition from genetic to temperature-dependent sex. Nature 523:79. doi: 10.1038/nature14574PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarHu, Q., Chen, S., Gao, F., Li, Y., Liu, S., Liu, F., et al. (2014). Differences in sex reversion and growth between normal and neomale stock in half-smooth tongue sole. Cynoglossus semilaevis. Aquacult. Int. 22, 1437–1449.Google ScholarHuang, D. W., Sherman, B. T., and Lempicki, R. A. (2008). Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat. Protoc. 4, 44–57. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2008.211PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarJaenisch, R., and Bird, A. (2003). Epigenetic regulation of gene expression: how the genome integrates intrinsic and environmental signals. Nat. Genet. 33(Suppl.), 245–254.PubMed Abstract | Google ScholarJiang, L., and Li, H. (2017). Single locus maintains large variation of sex reversal in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). G3 7, 583–589. doi: 10.1534/g3.116.036822PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKanehisa, M., Araki, M., Goto, S., Hattori, M., Hirakawa, M., Itoh, M., et al. (2008). KEGG for linking genomes to life and the environment. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, D480–D484.PubMed Abstract | Google ScholarKim, D., and Salzberg, S. L. (2011). TopHat-fusion: an algorithm for discovery of novel fusion transcripts. Genome Biol. 12, R72–R72. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-8-r72PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKitano, T., Hayashi, Y., Shiraishi, E., and Kamei, Y. (2012). Estrogen rescues masculinization of genetically female medaka by exposure to cortisol or high temperature. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 79, 719–726. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22080PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKohno, S., Katsu, Y., Urushitani, H., Ohta, Y., Iguchi, T., and Guillette, L. J. (2010). Potential contributions of heat shock proteins to temperature-dependent sex determination in the American alligator. Sex. Dev. 4, 73–87. doi: 10.1159/000260374PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarLance, V. A. (2009). Is regulation of aromatase expression in reptiles the key to understanding temperature-dependent sex determination? J. Exp. Zool. A Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 311, 314–322. doi: 10.1002/jez.465PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarMatsumoto, Y., Hannigan, B., and Crews, D. (2016). Temperature shift alters dna methylation and histone modification patterns in gonadal aromatase (cyp19a1) gene in species with temperature-dependent sex determination. PLoS One 11:e0167362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167362PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarNakamura, M. (2010). The mechanism of sex determination in vertebrates-are sex steroids the key-factor? J. Exp. Zool. A Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 313, 381–398. doi: 10.1002/jez.616PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarNavara, K. J. (2010). Programming of offspring sex ratios by maternal stress in humans: assessment of physiological mechanisms using a comparative approach. J. Comp. Physiol. B 180, 785–796. doi: 10.1007/s00360-010-0483-9PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarNavarro-Martín, L., Viñas, J., Ribas, L., Díaz, N., Gutiérrez, A., Di Croce, L., et al. (2011). DNA methylation of the gonadal aromatase (cyp19a) promoter is involved in temperature-dependent sex ratio shifts in the European sea bass. PLoS Genet. 7:e1002447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002447PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarObel, C., Henriksen, T. B., Secher, N. J., Eskenazi, B., and Hedegaard, M. (2007). Psychological distress during early gestation and offspring sex ratio. Hum. Reprod. 22, 3009–3012.Google ScholarOspina-Álvarez, N., and Piferrer, F. (2008). Temperature-dependent sex determination in fish revisited: prevalence, a single sex ratio response pattern, and possible effects of climate change. PLoS One 3:e2837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002837PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarParrott, B. B., Kohno, S., Cloy-McCoy, J. A., and Guillette, J. L. J. (2014). Differential incubation temperatures result in dimorphic dna methylation patterning of the SOX9 and aromatase promoters in gonads of alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) embryos. Biol. Reprod. 90, 1–11. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.111468PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarPieau, C., and Dorizzi, M. (2004). Oestrogens and temperature-dependent sex determination in reptiles: all is in the gonads. J. Endocrinol. 181, 367–377.Google ScholarPiferrer, F. (2013). Epigenetics of sex determination and gonadogenesis. Dev. Dyn. 242, 360–370. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23924PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarPike, T. W., and Petrie, M. (2006). Experimental evidence that corticosterone affects offspring sex ratios in quail. Proc. R. Soc. B 273, 1093–1098.PubMed Abstract | Google ScholarReik, W., Dean, W., and Walter, J. (2001). Epigenetic reprogramming in mammalian development. Science 293:1089.Google ScholarRhen, T., and Schroeder, A. (2010). Molecular mechanisms of sex determination in reptiles. Sex. Dev. 4, 16–28. doi: 10.1159/000282495PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarRoberts, A., Pimentel, H., Trapnell, C., and Pachter, L. (2011). Identification of novel transcripts in annotated genomes using RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics 27, 2325–2329. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr355PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarRobledo, D., Ribas, L., Cal, R., Sánchez, L., Piferrer, F., Martínez, P., et al. (2015). Gene expression analysis at the onset of sex differentiation in turbot (Scophthalmus maximus). BMC Genomics 16:973. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2142-8PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarRottach, A., Leonhardt, H., and Spada, F. (2009). DNA methylation-mediated epigenetic control. J. Cell. Biochem. 108, 43–51. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22253PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSarre, S. D., Ezaz, T., and Georges, A. (2011). Transitions between sex-determining systems in reptiles and amphibians. Annual. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 12, 391–406. doi: 10.1146/annurev-genom-082410-101518PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSchnettler, S., and Klüsener, S. (2014). Economic stress or random variation? Revisiting German reunification as a natural experiment to investigate the effect of economic contraction on sex ratios at birth. Environ. Health 13, 1–13.Google ScholarSchroeder, A. L., Metzger, K. J., Miller, A., and Rhen, T. (2016). A novel candidate gene for temperature-dependent sex determination in the common snapping turtle. Genetics 203:557. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.182840PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarShao, C., Li, Q., Chen, S., Zhang, P., Lian, J., Hu, Q., et al. (2014). Epigenetic modification and inheritance in sexual reversal of fish. Genome Res. 24, 604–615. doi: 10.1101/gr.162172.113PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSi, Y., Ding, Y., He, F., Wen, H., Li, J., Zhao, J., et al. (2016). DNA methylation level of cyp19a1a and Foxl2 gene related to their expression patterns and reproduction traits during ovary development stages of Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus). Gene 575, 321–330. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.006PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarSimpson, E. R., Mahendroo, M. S., Means, G. D., Kilgore, M. W., Hinshelwood, M. M., Graham-Lorence, S., et al. (1994). Aromatase cytochrome P450, the enzyme responsible for estrogen biosynthesis. Endocr. Rev. 15, 342–355.Google ScholarStrüssmann, C. A., Moriyama, S., Hanke, E. F., Cota, J. C. C., and Takashima, F. (1996). Evidence of thermolabile sex determination in pejerrey. J. Fish Biol. 48, 643–651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102574PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarTodd, E. V., Liu, H., Muncaster, S., and Gemmell, N. J. (2016). Bending Genders: the biology of natural sex change in fish. Sex. Dev. 10, 223–241. doi: 10.1159/000449297PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarTrapnell, C., Hendrickson, D. G., Sauvageau, M., Goff, L., Rinn, J. L., and Pachter, L. (2012). Differential analysis of gene regulation at transcript resolution with RNA-seq. Nat. Biotechnol. 31:46. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2450PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarValdivia, K., Jouanno, E., Volff, J. N., Galiana-Arnoux, D., Guyomard, R., Helary, L., et al. (2014). High temperature increases the masculinization rate of the all-female (XX) rainbow trout “male” population. PLoS One 9:e113355. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113355PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholarvan den Heuvel, M. I., van Assen, M. A. L. M., Glover, V., Claes, S., and Van den Bergh, B. R. H. (2018). Associations between maternal psychological distress and salivary cortisol during pregnancy: a mixed-models approach. Psychoneuroendocrinology 96, 52–60. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2018.06.005PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarWang, X., Jiang, J., Gao, J., Liu, J., Qi, J., Wang, Z., et al. (2013). Identification of two novel female-specific DNA sequences in half-smooth tongue sole. Cynoglossus semilaevis. Aquaculture 388, 49–53.Google ScholarWang, X., Zhang, Q., Ren, J., Jiang, Z., Wang, C., Zhuang, W., et al. (2009). The preparation of sex-chromosome-specific painting probes and construction of sex chromosome DNA library in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Aquaculture 297, 78–84.Google ScholarWang, Y. Y., Sun, L. X., Zhu, J. J., Zhao, Y., Wang, H., Liu, H. J., et al. (2017). Epigenetic control of cyp19a1a expression is critical for high temperature induced Nile tilapia masculinization. J. Therm. Biol. 69, 76–84. doi: 10.1016/j.jtherbio.2017.06.006PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarYamamoto, Y., Zhang, Y., Sarida, M., Hattori, R. S., and Strüssmann, C. A. (2014). Coexistence of genotypic and temperature-dependent sex determination in pejerrey Odontesthes bonariensis. PLoS One 9:e102574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102574PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarYatsu, R., Miyagawa, S., Kohno, S., Parrott, B. B., Yamaguchi, K., Ogino, Y., et al. (2016). RNA-seq analysis of the gonadal transcriptome during Alligator mississippiensis temperature-dependent sex determination and differentiation. BMC Genomics 17:77. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2396-9PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarYoshinaga, N., Yamaguchi, T., Kitano, T., Yazawa, T., and Gen, K. (2010). Cortisol is involved in temperature-dependent sex determination in the Japanese flounder. Endocrinology 151, 3900–3908. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0228PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarZhang, Y., Zhang, S., Liu, Z., Zhang, L., and Zhang, W. (2013). Epigenetic modifications during sex change repress gonadotropin stimulation of cyp19a1a in a teleost ricefield eel (Monopterus albus). Endocrinology 154, 2881–2890. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2220PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarZhou, L., Yang, A., Liu, X., Du, W., and Zhuang, Z. (2005). The karyotype of the tonguefish Cynoglossus semilaevis. J. Fish. China 29, 417–419.Google ScholarKeywords: high-temperature treatment, RNA-seq, cyp19a1a, DNA methylation, Cynoglossus semilaevisCitation: Liu J, Liu X, Jin C, Du X, He Y and Zhang Q (2019) Transcriptome Profiling Insights the Feature of Sex Reversal Induced by High Temperature in Tongue Sole Cynoglossus semilaevis. Front. Genet. 10:522. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00522Received: 16 November 2018; Accepted: 13 May 2019;
Published: 29 May 2019.Edited by:Reviewed by:Copyright © 2019 Liu, Liu, Jin, Du, He and Zhang. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.*Correspondence: Quanqi Zhang, qzhang@ouc.edu.cnLhx9 gene from Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) was cloned and characterized.Their expression profiles in different tissues were examined.The methylation profiles were analyzed.The analogously potential role of CS-Lhx9 was first proved in Chinese tongue sole.Lhx9 is a LIM-homeodomain protein related to gonad development and sex reversal. In this study, we cloned and characterized CS-Lhx9 in the gonads of the Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). The full-length cDNA of CS-Lhx9 was 3123 bp, including an ORF of 1149 bp encoding 383 amino acids which contains two LIM domains and a homeobox domain. CS-Lhx9 transcripts were primarily observed in the testis of male and neomale at 1 yah, but nearly undetectable in the ovary. During the development of gonad, CS-Lhx9 exhibited an increasing trend and appeared to reach its peak value of expression in testis at 1 yah. In situ hybridization was performed in male and neomale gonads at 210 dah and 1 yah. The results showed strong CS-Lhx9 signals in the spermatids and spermatozoa (germ cells). Methylation level of CS-Lhx9 promoter was higher in female and lower in male and neomale gonads, showing a negative correlation with CS-Lhx9 expression.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.AdvertisementHeredity
 121, 
319–326(2018)Cite this article1143 Accesses7 Citations4 AltmetricMetricsSex reversal in insects, amphibians, reptiles, and fishes is a complicated and interesting biological phenomenon. Sex reversal changes the sex ratio of populations and may complicate breeding schemes. In the Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis), genetic females may change into pseudomales, thereby increasing aquaculture costs because of the lower growth rate of the males than that of the females. Here we identify a new locus associated with sex reversal; this single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is located in the third intron of the doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (Dmrt1) gene on the Z chromosome (named Cyn_Z_8564889) and has two alleles, A and G. Cyn_Z_8564889 regulates sex reversal interactively with our previously detected SNP (Cyn_Z_6676874), with the genetic females simultaneously carrying the T allele of Cyn_Z_6676874 and the A allele of Cyn_Z_8564889 changing into pseudomales. Other Dmrt1 polymorphisms were detected, which formed two haplotypes. Two SNPs in the second exon of Dmrt1 result in amino acid changes, suggesting that Dmrt1 is essential in sex reversal. We also verified that pseudomales produce no or little W sperm. The interaction and linkage between Cyn_Z_6676874 and Cyn_Z_8564889 and the absence of W sperm from pseudomales unravel the genetic architecture of sex reversal in C. semilaevis.The sex of vertebrates is usually determined by chromosomal form, called genetic sex determination (GSD), e.g., the XY male/XX female system in mammals and the ZW female/ZZ male system in birds. However, for some species, the primary sex can be changed during development. Sex reversal is an interesting biological phenomenon and can happen in insects (Narita et al. 2007), reptiles (Quinn et al. 2007), amphibians (Wallace et al. 1999), and fish (Nagahama 2005). Ecologists consider it an evolutionary reproductive strategy for animals to adapt to the environment (Ghiselin 1974; Shapiro 1987). Environmental factors, such as temperature, hormones, and pH, may affect sex reversal, but many studies have focused on temperature. High temperature can induce female-to-male sex reversal in Triturus cristatus (Wallace et al. 1999) and the Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) (Chen et al. 2014) and male-to-female reversal in Pogona vitticeps (Holleley et al. 2015). Environment-dependent sex determination (ESD) and GSD are not mutually exclusive (Sarre et al 2004). It is widely acknowledged that the sex of vertebrates is determined by genetic factors, which can interact with external environmental factors in the early stages of development (Shapiro 1987). In Oryzias latipes, sex reversal is controlled simultaneously by an autosomal locus and sex-determining region on the Y chromosome (Kato et al. 2010, 2011; Shinomiya et al. 2005). In P. vitticeps, sex reversal can shift from GSD to temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD), indicating that genetic background may be critical (Jiang and Li 2017). Several genes have been found to be involved in TSD in turtles (Chojnowski and Braun 2012), showing the interaction between genetic and environmental factors.Sex reversal changes the sex ratios in populations, which may affect broodstock management in fish farming. The Chinese tongue sole is an indigenous and important economic marine flatfish in China. Female fish are preferred in tongue sole aquaculture because the adult female is 2–4 times larger than the adult male. However, some genetic female tongue soles reverse into phenotypic males at day 50–90. Sex-reversed or pseudomale fish grow as slowly as normal males do. Because of sex reversal, the female percentages have decreased gradually in recent years and currently average below 20%. Sex reversal has increased costs considerably for farmers, and improving and maintaining female ratios have become urgent and important issues in tongue sole aquaculture. Some investigators have attempted to improve female ratios by producing all-female offspring with super female WW fish (Chen et al. 2012), but this is not feasible because WW fish cannot survive the early stages of development (Chen et al. 2014). Use of pseudomales was also considered to improve female ratios, but all genetic female offspring of pseudomales change to pseudomales. In our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017), single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) Cyn_Z_6676874 was associated with sex reversal, and selecting male broodstock with ZAZA genotype improved the female ratio to 0.5. Although this SNP explains ~83% of genetic variance, it was obvious that other genes were involved in sex reversal because not all ZTW genetic females changed into pseudomales. In the current study, we sampled genetic females of only the ZTW genotype of SNP Cyn_Z_6676874, obtained their sex-reversal phenotype using tissue sections, and performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to detect the genetic loci interacting with the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874. A new locus was identified to regulate sex reversal interactively with the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874; the linkage between these two loci and the absence of W sperm for pseudomales clearly elucidates the genetic architecture of sex reversal in the tongue sole.Population 1: A batch of fry was randomly collected from nine families at Hanhai Aqua. Co. Ltd. at Weifang, Shandong Province, China, in 2016. The fry was raised for 120 days at a constant temperature of 22 °C in the same pond to avoid environmental effects. Five hundred fish were randomly selected for sex determination and tissue sections. Based on our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017), all fish were genotyped for the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874, from which 171 fish of the ZTW genotype were selected for 2b-restriction site–associated DNA (RAD) genotyping and GWAS. Among these fish, 94 changed into males, and 77 were normal females.Population 2: In August 2017, 500 fish that were unknown to be closely related to population 1 were randomly harvested from Jiehai Aqua Co. Ltd. Among them, 259 genetic females were identified and used for validation of our newly detected polymorphism associated with sex reversal, and the genetic interaction between it and the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874.Population 3: It has been reported that pseudomale tongue sole will not produce W spermatozoa (Holleley et al. 2015). This finding is critically important for us to draw conclusions about the genetic architecture of the sex reversal of tongue sole, because it is difficult to prevent somatic cells from contaminating the milt during squeezing. In order to examine whether a pseudomale will produce W spermatozoa, 15 mature pseudomales were randomly selected from Jiehai Aqua. Co. Ltd. Their fins and semen were collected for DNA extraction, representing somatic cell DNA and sperm cell DNA, respectively.Fins and gonads were sampled for DNA extraction and sex determination. The genetic sex was determined with fin DNA using a previously described sex-specific marker (Liu et al. 2014). Phenotypic sex was determined by tissue sectioning of gonads; the details of the tissue sectioning were described in our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017). Sex reversal was determined by comparing genetic and phenotypic sex, accordingly.DNA was extracted from the fins of all individuals. To verify whether a pseudomale can produce W sperm, DNA was also extracted from the semen of the pseudomales. The DNA extraction protocols for fins and semen were similar and as follows:(1) Semen DNA preparation: Frozen semen (~3 mg) and 200 μl lysis buffer was placed in a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and vortexed for 10 min at room temperature(20–25 °C) The mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 r.p.m. for 1 min and the supernatant was discarded. Lysis buffer (170 μl) and 5 μl of proteinase K (20 mg/ml) were added to the pellet, mixed thoroughly by vortexing, and then digested at 65 °C for 2 h. Five microliters of DNase-I (5 U/μl) and 20 μl 10× reaction buffer was added, and the mixture was digested at 37 °C for 30 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for 15 min. One milliliter of ethanol was added to the supernatant and the precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 r.p.m. for 1 min. The DNA pellet was dried at room temperature for 20 min.(2) Fin DNA preparation: Approximately 10 mg of fin was minced or ground and placed in a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. Lysis buffer (400 μl) and 5 μl proteinase K (20 mg/ml) was added and the mixture incubated at 65 °C until the insoluble material was completely dissolved. The mixture was extracted with an equal volume of phenol: chloroform: isoamyl alcohol (25: 24: 1), and the aqueous phase was transferred to a new 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. After adding an equal volume of isopropanol and 0.1 volume of 3 M sodium acetate (pH = 5.2), the mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 r.p.m. for 10 min and the supernatant discarded. Finally, the pellet was washed three times with 1 ml 75% ethanol, centrifuging at 12,000 r.p.m. for 2 min between washes. The DNA pellet was dried at room temperature for 20 min.All dried pellets were dissolved in 20 μl sterilized water and stored at 4 °C.A total of 1071 genetic females in population 1 were genotyped using the 2b-RAD method from Oebiotech Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The 2b-RAD libraries were prepared with BsaXI following the reported protocol (Wang et al. 2012), and subjected to single-end sequencing using an Illumina Hiseq 2500 platform. By sequencing, a total of 1,807,470,684 reads was produced, averaging 10,570,004 reads per sample. The 2b-RAD genotyping was performed with RADtyping v1.5 software (Fu et al. 2013). Reads with no restriction sites, or those containing ambiguous base calls (N), long homopolymer regions (>10 bp), or excessive numbers of low quality positions (>10 positions with quality of <20) were removed. Finally, 186,928 unique tags were obtained; the average level of coverage was 37× per sample. In total, 136,267 SNP genotypes were obtained and mapped to the C. semilaevis genome with SOAP2 (Li et al. 2009). The SNPs with minor allele frequencies of <5% or call rates of <0.80 were discarded. The missing genotypes were imputed through disequilibrium with 10 close neighboring markers, as in our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017). After quality control, the final genotypic data in the analysis consisted of 33,410 SNPs without missing genotypes (Table 1).Sex reversal was considered a binomial trait, and the incidence of sex reversal was recorded as 1, while its absence was recorded as 0. A logistic linear mixed model was used to perform GWAS:where logit (y) = p/(1-p), and p is the frequency of sex reversal, m is the SNP genotype (assumed to be a fixed effect), b is the allele substitution effect, g is the additive effect that follows the distribution N(0, Kσg2), K is the realized genetic relationship matrix, and e is the random error that follows the distribution N(0, Kσg2). Construction of K followed these procedures: (1) code the genotype matrix M for each marker, 0 for homozygote, 1 for heterozygote, and 2 for the other homozygote, (2) standardize M to Z with the mean and the standard deviation of each SNP, and (3) calculate K as ZZʹ/nm, where nm is the number of markers. An association analysis of each SNP was conducted by comparing the full model to the null model:The −2*log-likelihood test statistics approximately followed a χ2 distribution with a degree of freedom of 1. To improve the computational speed, a method similar to that of the efficient multi-locus mixed model (Segura et al. 2012) was adopted. First, DMU (Madsen and Jensen 2002) was employed to estimate the variance components, σg2 and σe2. Then, the linear mixed model was transformed to a simple linear regression through the Cholesky decomposition of the phenotypic covariance structure V as the following equation:where y* = V−1/2 logit(y), M* = V−1/2M, V = Kσg2 + Iσe2, and m* is the corresponding SNP column of M* matrix. After a genome san, whether a quantitative trait locus (QTL) existed was determined according to the critical threshold value calculated with Peipho’s approach (Piepho 2001). Once a genetic locus was identified, the corresponding 95% confidence interval was calculated using Li’s method (Li 2011).All the handling of fish was conducted in accordance with the Guidelines on the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes setup by the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences.GWAS was conducted with individuals of genotype ZTW of the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874. A single SNP at 8,564,889 bp on the Z chromosome (named Cyn_Z_8564889) was found to be strongly associated with sex reversal in the Half-smooth tongue sole (P < 1.0 × 10−28, Fig. 1) of genotype ZTW at the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874. The new SNP was located at the third intron of the doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (Dmrt1) gene, which is known to be gonad-specific and shows sexually dimorphic expression patterns. The protein that it codes contains a conservative base sequence with DNA binding capacity, named DM structural domain (doublesex and Mab-3). The zinc finger structure combined with specific DNA sequences participates in the regulation of sex determination and gonadal differentiation in vertebrates and non-vertebrates (Smith et al. 1999). SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 has two alleles, G and A, and there are usually two genotypes for pseudomales, because it is located on the Z chromosome. However, two individuals in population 1 were genotyped as AG by sequencing PCR products (Fig. S1), which showed the possibility of duplication of Dmrt1 in Chinese tongue sole. The individuals with ZT,GGW genotype (the superscript corresponds to the genotypes of Cyn_Z_6676874 and Cyn_Z_8564889, respectively) would not reverse; whereas, the individuals with ZT,AGW and ZT,AAW genotypes all reversed into phenotypic males. The 95% confidence interval of the SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 was from 8,564,250 to 8,610,045 bp, where only two known genes were located. These two genes were Dmrt1 and Kank1 (KN motif and ankyrin repeat domains 1), the latter of which is involved in the control of cytoskeletal formation by regulating actin polymerization.Genome-wide association study (GWAS) of sex reversal of half-smooth tongue sole of ZTW genotype on SNP Cyn_Z_6676874. The x-axis represents the genomic coordinates along chromosomes 1–20 and sex chromosomes W and Z. The y-axis represents the negative logarithm of P-values. The horizontal dashed line is the genome-wide threshold; SNPs above this line are significantly associated with sex reversalAlignment of Dmrt1 cDNA sequences (NCBI Accession: EU007655) to Z chromosome genomic sequences of tongue sole (NCBI Accession: NC_024328.1) determined that Dmrt1 contains five exons and four introns. The fragments amplified for genotyping SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 contained partial sequences of the second and third intron of Dmrt1. Besides SNP Cyn_Z_8564889, six SNPs and two indels were found in this region (Fig. 2, Table 2), and the indel in the second intron of Dmrt1 is a 7-bp insertion/deletion polymorphism. To explore whether there are sex-related SNPs on other coding sequence (CDS) regions of Dmrt1, primers were designed and the other four Dmrt1 exons were amplified (Table 3). Two SNPs were found in the second exon (Fig. 2, Table 2); the SNP C → A at position 8,566,940 and SNP C → T at position 8,566,916 will cause the amino acid changes Ala → Ser and Val → Ile, respectively (Fig. S2). Therefore, we speculated that these amino acid changes affected the sex reversal of the Half-smooth tongue sole. By sequencing 15 fish of ZT,GGW genotype and 15 fish of ZT,AAW genotype, the nine SNPs and two indels that we found in Dmrt1 formed two haplotypes (Fig. 2, Table 2). These polymorphisms can also be used to genotype the SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 as a substitution.Structure of the Dmrt1 gene and the polymorphisms that it contains. The horizontal cylinders and gray lines represent the exons and introns of Dmrt1, respectively, and the numbers indicate their corresponding lengths. The vertical lines show the positions of polymorphisms. The pentagon-surrounded bases are the two alleles of SNP Cyn_Z_8564889, the circled bases are the SNPs, and the orthogon-surrounded bases are indels. The polymorphisms formed two haplotypes, the upper and lower polymorphisms stand for each haplotypes, respectivelyIt had been confirmed in our previous study that ZAW fish at SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 do not reverse into pseudomales (Jiang and Li 2017), but the new locus SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 was identified with only ZTW samples in this study. Therefore, it was obvious that there was a genetic interaction between SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 and Cyn_Z_8564889, which simultaneously regulated sex reversal in tongue sole. Genetic females will reverse into pseudomales only if they contain both allele T in SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 and allele A in SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 simultaneously (Table 4). These two SNPs explained all genetic variance of sex reversal in tongue sole.To confirm SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 and its interaction with the SNP Cyn_Z_6676874, the target fragments containing these two SNPs were amplified and sequenced for population 2. Considering SNP Cyn_Z_6676874, among 259 genetic female fish (Table 4), 92 individuals were the ZAW genotype and none of them reversed into pseudomales, while 44 individuals of the ZTW genotype reversed into pseudomales. This was consistent with the results of our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017). Considering SNP Cyn_Z_8564889, 214 fish were the ZGGW genotype and none of them reversed into pseudomales, while 39 ZAAW and 5 ZAGW genotype fish reversed. Considering SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 and Cyn_Z_8564889 simultaneously, only the ZT,A_W genotype fish reversed, while the fish containing either the A allele of SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 or the GG genotype for SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 did not reverse into pseudomales (Table 4).The semen of tongue sole is usually a mixture of sperm and tissue somatic cells arising from squeezing during milt collection. Hence, we repeated several DNA extractions and PCR reactions for 15 pseudomales. The W bands were usually absent by agarose gel electrophoresis, but they were sometimes faintly visible (Fig. 3); it mainly depended on the somatic cell content in semen and lysis time during DNA extraction. If W sperm was present, the W bands of semen DNA should be as distinct as that of fin DNA. Therefore, we concluded that the pseudomales cannot produce W sperm at all, or at least at levels that are comparable to Z sperm as would be expected if gametogenesis were normal.Differences between fin and sperm DNA amplified with sex-specific primers for pseudomales. a The 169 and 134 bp bands were Z and W chromosome-specific, respectively. Pseudomales contained both Z and W chromosomes; therefore, the W bands were detected in their fin DNA. The absence of W bands amplified with sperm DNA of a pseudomale showed that it cannot produce W sperm. b A replication, although the W band can sometimes be detected in the sperm of a pseudomale, this band was very faint compared with that from the fins. In this context, the faint amplification of the W band depended on the presence of somatic cell DNA in the semen and lysis time during DNA extractionSex reversal is the most important issue in tongue sole aquaculture. In this study, SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 was identified as the second locus strongly associated with sex reversal. It was linked with and close to SNP Cyn_Z_6676874; they simultaneously and interactively regulated sex reversal in the tongue sole. Based on their genetic architecture, some important aspects regarding sex reversal in the Chinese tongue sole can now be explained more clearly.As can be seen in Table 4, both SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 and Cyn_Z_8564889 played a role in sex reversal. When SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 is detected, in theory, SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 should also be detected readily. However, we did not identify SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 in our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017). We reassessed the 115 samples in our previous study and found that SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 and other SNPs in the confidence interval had not been successfully genotyped. After genotyping the 115 fish for SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 by sequencing, only one individual was found to carry the GG genotype. Therefore, it was impossible to detect SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 with the samples in our previous study because of low detection power and lack of sufficient markers.In our previous study (Jiang and Li 2017), we found that all the genetic female offspring of a pseudomale would reverse into males, but we did not understand the reasons at that time. Now, this puzzle has been solved with the identification of the new locus in our study and through the pseudomale spermatogenesis validation experiment. A pseudomale, containing both the Z and W chromosomes, was usually regarded as an alternative to improve the female proportion in tongue sole aquaculture. We have confirmed that pseudomales produce mostly or only Z sperm, which had been partially confirmed in our previous study. The offspring of pseudomales included 24 pseudomales (ZW) and 22 normal males (ZZ) (Table 3 in the ref. Jiang and Li 2017), and the ratio of ZW/ZZ was nearly 1. If a pseudomale can produce W sperm, the ratio of ZW/ZZ should be 2/1, because WW individuals cannot survive. However, the ratio was significantly less than 2/1 (P = 0.037). The Z chromosome of pseudomales harbors the T allele of SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 and the A allele of SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 simultaneously. Since there is no homologous chromosome for the Z chromosome, it does not experience synapsis during meiosis. These two unfavorable alleles are in linkage and the unfavorable T-A haplotype has no opportunity to separate through crossover and recombination. Therefore, the genetic female offspring of pseudomales are doomed to inherit this unfavorable haplotype and reverse into male generation after generation, expanding very quickly in the population and leading to extremely low percentages of phenotypic females in tongue sole aquaculture. Regarding this issue, using comparative analysis of the gonadal DNA methylomes of pseudomale, female, and normal male fish, Shao et al. (2014) proposed that epigenetic regulation plays multiple crucial roles in the sexual reversal of the tongue sole fish. We believe that the similarity in DNA methylation profiles between pseudomales and normal males may be the result of, and not the reason for, sex reversal; the genetic interaction between the two loci that we found and the absence of W sperm for pseudomales should be the fundamental reasons for sex reversal, and also the possible reason for methylation. The polymorphisms in the two haplotypes (Table 2, Fig. 2) will be translated into different amino acids, which may regulate DNA methylation and the differentiation of sexual gonads. DNA methylation is tissue specific, and very unlikely to have caused DNA mutation.It is known that pseudomales are the main reason for low female percentages in tongue sole aquaculture. Once a pseudomale is selected for breeding, the female percentages in future generations will decrease significantly. However, it is easier to select a pseudomale over a normal male, not only because pseudomale percentages have increased during the last decade, but also because pseudomales are larger than normal males when mature (Li et al. 2017), although they are smaller than the normal females. It was traditionally thought that larger fathers beget larger children, and breeders preferred larger males for breeding. Recently, some breeders began to examine candidate paternal fish to avoid using pseudomales for breeding, and the percentages of phenotypic females improved, albeit very slowly, because the frequency of favorable alleles of SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 and Cyn_Z_6676874 had become very low owing to the lack of knowledge of the genetic architecture of sex reversal. The genetic interaction between SNP Cyn_Z_8564889 and Cyn_Z_6676874 provides flexible options to select candidate parental fish for breeders. Any single or combined SNP examination can be utilized to improve phenotypic female ratios. Examinations of these two SNPs can also be used to predict sex reversal incidence in the larval stage, which provides the possibility of designing experiments to study sex reversal more intensively.Before 2017, the genes directly regulating sex differentiation in tongue sole were unknown. Dmrt1 was once speculated as the critical gene regulating sex differentiation (Chen et al. 2014), but with little direct genetic evidence. Herein, Dmrt1 was mapped to associate with sex reversal in the tongue sole fish through GWAS, which provided solid evidence for this speculation. By knocking out the Dmrt1 gene of the genetic male tongue sole, ovary-like testes develop and spermatogenesis is disrupted (Cui et al. 2017). Dmrt1 was verified as the essential gene of sex differentiation by forward and backward genetic evidence. Similarly, Dmrt1 was shown to be the primary gene associated with sex reversal in the Chinese soft-shelled turtles (Sun et al. 2017). Sex in both the tongue sole fish and turtles is determined by the ZW chromosome system, and this comparison is perhaps beneficial to understand sex differentiation in the ZW chromosome species. In our study, we found that Dmrt1 may be duplicated, which has also been observed in other species. Its duplication mode and effect on sex reversal should be studied further in future research.Supplementary file S1 is a phenotypic file containing id, sire, dam, genetic sex, phenotypic sex, and incidence of sex reversal. Supplementary file S2 contains genotypes (coded as 0, 1, and 2) of the 171 samples, and supplementary file S3 is the SNP information. Data available from the Dryad Digital Repository: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.n8h5147.Chen SL, Ji XS, Shao CW, Li WL, Yang JF, Liang Z et al. (2012) Induction of mitogynogenetic diploids and identification of WW super-female using sex-specific SSR markers in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Mar Biotechnol 14:120–128Article
  Google Scholar
 Chen SL, Zhang GJ, Shao CW, Huang QF, Liu G, Zhang P et al. (2014) Whole-genome sequence of a flatfish provides insights into ZW sex chromosome evolution and adaptation to a benthic lifestyle. Nat Genet 46:253–260CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Chojnowski JL, Braun EL (2012) An unbiased approach to identify genes involved in development in a turtle with temperature-dependent sex determination. BMC Genom 13:308CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Cui ZK, Liu Y, Wang WW, Wang Q, Zhang N, Lin F et al. (2017) Genome editing reveals dmrt1 as an essential male sex-determining gene in Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Sci Rep 7:42213CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Fu XT, Dou JZ, Mao JX, Su H, Jiao WQ, Zhang LL et al. (2013) RADtyping: an integrated package for accurate de novo codominant and dominant RAD genotyping in mapping populations. PLoS ONE 8:e79960Article
  Google Scholar
 Ghiselin MT (1974) The economy of nature and the evolution of sex. University of California Press, BerkeleyGoogle Scholar
 Holleley CE, O’Meally D, Sarre SD, Marshall Graves JA, Ezaz T, Matsubara K et al. (2015) Sex reversal triggers the rapid transition from genetic to temperature-dependent sex. Nature 523:79–82CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Jiang L, Li HD (2017) Single locus maintains large variation of sex reversal in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). G3 7:583–589CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Kato M, Takehana Y, Fukuda Y, Naruse K, Sakaizumi M, Hamaguchi S (2011) An autosomal locus controls sex reversal in interspecific XY hybrids of the medaka fishes. Heredity 107:523–529CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Kato M, Takehana Y, Sakaizumi M, Hamaguchi S (2010) A sex-determining region on the Y chromosome controls the sex-reversal ratio in interspecific hybrids between Oryzias curvinotus females and Oryzias latipes males. Heredity 104:191–195CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Li H, Tian YS, Li XK, Chen ZF, Song LN, Duan HM (2017) The phenotypic and genetic Traits analysis of ZZ Males and ZW Males (sex-inverted males) of Cynoglossus semilaevis. Prog Fish Sci 3:62–69. (in Chinese with English abstract)Google Scholar
 Li HD (2011) A quick method to calculate QTL confidence interval. J Genet 90:355–360Article
  Google Scholar
 Li RQ, Yu C, Li YR, Lam TW, Yiu SM, Kristiansen K et al. (2009) SOAP2: an improved ultrafast tool for short read alignment. Bioinformatics 25:1966–1967CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Liu Y, Chen SL, Gao FT, Meng L, Hu QM, Song WT et al. (2014) SCAR-transformation of sex-specific SSR Marker and Its Application in Half-smooth Tongue Sole (Cynoglossus semiliaevis). J Agr Biotechnol 22:787–792. (in Chinese with English abstract)CAS
  Google Scholar
 Madsen P, Jensen J (2002) A User’s Guide to DMU. Danish Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Research Center Foulum, DenmarkGoogle Scholar
 Nagahama Y (2005) Molecular mechanisms of sex determination and gonadal sex differentiation in fish. Fish Physiol Biochem 31:105–109CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Narita S, Kageyama D, Nomura M, Fukatsu T (2007) Unexpected mechanism of symbiont-induced reversal of insect sex: Feminizing Wolbachia continuously acts on the butterfly Eurema hecabe during larval development. Appl Environ Microb 73:4332–4341CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Piepho HP (2001) A quick method for computing approximate thresholds for quantitative trait loci detection. Genetics 157:425–432CAS
  PubMed
  PubMed Central
  Google Scholar
 Quinn AE, Georges A, Sarre SD, Guarino F, Ezaz T, Graves JAM (2007) Temperature sex reversal implies sex gene dosage in a reptile. Science 316:411–411CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Sarre SD, Georges A, Quinn A (2004) The ends of a continuum: genetic and temperature-dependent sex determination in reptiles. Bioessays 26:639–645Article
  Google Scholar
 Segura V, Vilhjalmsson BJ, Platt A, Korte A, Seren U, Long Q et al. (2012) An efficient multi-locus mixed-model approach for genome-wide association studies in structured populations. Nat Genet 44:825–830CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Shao CW, Li Q, Chen SL, Zhang P, Lian JM, Hu QM et al. (2014) Epigenetic modification and inheritance in sexual reversal of fish. Genome Res 24:604–615CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Shapiro DY (1987) Differentiation and evolution of sex change in fishes. Bioscience 37:490–497Article
  Google Scholar
 Shinomiya A, Otake H, Hamaguchi S, Sakaizumi M (2005) An autosomal mutation induces female to male sex-reversal in the early sex-differentiating stage in the medaka. Oryzias latipes Mech Dev 122:S121–S121Google Scholar
 Smith CA, McClive PJ, Western PS, Reed KJ, Sinclair AH (1999) Conservation of a sex-determining gene. Nature 402:601–602CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Sun W, Cai H, Zhang G, Zhang H, Bao H, Wang L et al. (2017) Dmrt1 is required for primary male sexual differentiation in Chinese soft-shelled turtle Pelodiscus sinensis. Sci Rep 7:4433Article
  Google Scholar
 Wallace H, Badawy GM, Wallace BM (1999) Amphibian sex determination and sex reversal. Cell Mol Life Sci 55:901–909CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Wang S, Meyer E, McKay JK, Matz MV (2012) 2b-RAD: a simple and flexible method for genome-wide genotyping. Nat Methods 9:808–810CAS
  Article
  Google Scholar
 Download referencesThis research was supported by the Special Scientific Research Funds for Central Nonprofit Institutes, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences (grant 2016ZD0203).These authors contributed equally: Yu Cui, Weifeng WangNational Demonstration Center for Experimental Fisheries Science Education, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 201306, ChinaYu CuiCentre for Applied Aquatic Genomics, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Beijing, 100141, ChinaYu Cui, Weifeng Wang & Hengde LiCollege of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, ChinaWeifeng Wang & Huanling WangHanhai Aqua Co. Ltd. Weifang, 261311, Shangdong Province, ChinaLiyong MaJiehai Aqua Co. Ltd. China-Czech High Tech Park., Cangzhou, 061108, ChinaJinhua Jie & Yanhong ZhangKey Laboratory of Aquatic Genomics, Ministry of Agriculture, CAFS Key Laboratory of Aquatic Genomics and Beijing Key Laboratory of Fishery Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Beijing, 100141, ChinaHengde LiCorrespondence to Hengde Li.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.Reprints and PermissionsCui, Y., Wang, W., Ma, L. et al. New locus reveals the genetic architecture of sex reversal in the Chinese tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Heredity 121, 319–326 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41437-018-0126-6Download citationReceived
17 April 2018Revised
19 June 2018Accepted
06 July 2018Published
09 August 2018Issue Date
October 2018DOI
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41437-018-0126-6Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativePeerJ (2020)Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part D: Genomics and Proteomics (2020)BMC Genomics (2020)Frontiers in Genetics (2019)Marine Biotechnology (2019)Heredity
ISSN 1365-2540 (online)© 2020 Springer Nature LimitedWe use cookies to ensure the functionality of our website, to personalize content and advertising, to provide social media features, and to analyze our traffic. If you allow us to do so, we also inform our social media, advertising and analysis partners about your use of our website. You can decide for yourself which categories you want to deny or allow. Please note that based on your settings not all functionalities of the site are available. View our privacy policy•
The cDNA of R-spondin1 gene was isolated and characterized from C. semilaevis.
•
The expression profiles of R-spondin1 were analyzed by qRT-PCR.
•
The temporal and spatial expression patterns of R-spondin1 were detected in premature germ cells.
•
The DNA methylation sites of R-spondin1 promoter were different in male, female and pseudomale.
•
The reduction of R-spondin1 may potentially transform the female individuals to males after high temperature.The cDNA of R-spondin1 gene was isolated and characterized from C. semilaevis.The expression profiles of R-spondin1 were analyzed by qRT-PCR.The temporal and spatial expression patterns of R-spondin1 were detected in premature germ cells.The DNA methylation sites of R-spondin1 promoter were different in male, female and pseudomale.The reduction of R-spondin1 may potentially transform the female individuals to males after high temperature.R-spondin 1 (Rspo1) is a potential female-determining gene in mammals that could regulate the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. The deletion of Rspo1 causes sex reversal in females. To investigate sexual determination and differentiation, we cloned and analyzed the Rspo1 gene in Cynoglossus semilaevis. Phylogenetic and gene structure analyses revealed that Rspo1 gene exhibited high sequence conservation and contained an N-terminal signal peptide, two furin-like cysteine-rich domains (FU1 and FU2), a thrombospondin type 1 repeat, and a C-terminal region enriched with basic charged amino acids. qRT-PCR revealed that Rspo1 expressed sexual dimorphism in gonad, with higher expression levels in the ovary than in the testis, thus, suggesting the involvement of Rspo1 in gonad differentiation. In situ hybridization results demonstrated that Rspo1 was expressed in premature germ cells, including spermatogonia and spermatocytes in the testis and stage II and stage III oocytes in the ovary. The methylation levels in two CpG sites of Rspo1 promoter significantly differed among females, males, and pseudomales. After 30 days of exposure to high temperature, the expression of Rspo1 significantly decreased in female individuals, some of which were prone to males. However, no difference of Rspo1 gene expression was observed between the control group and high-temperature group in males. These preliminary findings suggested that Rspo1 played a crucial role in sex determination and development. This study laid the groundwork for further sex control breeding techniques in C. semilaevis.These authors contributed equally to this work.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.Advanced SearchSex determination is a fundamental biological process for individual sex development and population sex ratios. However, for some species, the primary sex might be altered during development, and individuals can develop into the opposite sex. Sex reversal may happen in insects, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes. In half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis), some genetically female fish irreversibly reverse to pseudomales, resulting in higher costs in aquaculture owing to a lower growth rate of male fish during a 2-yr growth period. Here, we identified a locus with large controlling effect on sex reversal in the half-smooth tongue sole through genome-wide association study with high-density single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). This SNP is located at the third intron of the F-box and leucine rich repeat protein 17 (FBXL17) gene on the Z chromosome, and it has two alleles, A and T. Genetic females with ZAW genotypes will never reverse into phenotypic males, but those with ZTW genotypes can sometimes undergo sex reversal. This SNP explains 82.7% of the genetic variation, or 58.4% of the phenotypic variation. Based on our results, a reproductive management program could be developed to improve the phenotypic female ratio in aquaculture, and elucidate the mechanism of sex reversal in half-smooth tongue sole. We expect that these findings will have a substantial impact on the population management in many harvested species where sex reversal occurs.Sex determination is a fundamental biological process for individual sex development and population sex ratios. Usually, mammals and birds show a genetic chromosomal form of sex determination, referred to as genetic sex determination (GSD). Mammals have an XY male/XX female system, and birds have a ZZ male/ZW female system. The GSD system is very stable for mammals and birds, and, therefore, it is thought sex is determined once the egg has been fertilized. However, for some species, the primary sex may be altered during development, and individuals can develop into the opposite sex, leading to sex ratios in populations departing from 1:1. This phenomenon is known as sex reversal, and may happen in insects (Narita et al. 2007), reptiles (Quinn et al. 2007), amphibians (Wallace et al. 1999), and fishes (Nagahama 2005).Ecologists considered sex reversal a successful, adaptive, and reproductive strategy for animals in evolution (Shapiro 1987; Ghiselin 1974). Many studies reported environmental factors, such as temperature, hormones, and pH values, critically affect sex reversal, of which temperature has been the most studied. Sex differentiation usually occurs during the early stages of development; cold treatment on uncleaved eggs to those undergoing early metamorphosis did not affect the sex ratio, whereas high temperatures tended to induce sex reversal from female to male, e.g., Triturus cristatus (Wallace et al. 1999) and half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) (S. Chen et al. 2014), or from males to females, e.g., Pogona vitticeps (Holleley et al. 2015).Temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) and GSD are not mutually exclusive dichotomies (Sarre et al. 2004); many species have stable differentiated sex chromosomes, but also show temperature interference, indicating sex reversal is determined by the interaction of genes and the environment. Evidence of sex reversal in P. vitticeps indicated a transition from GSD to TSD (Holleley et al. 2015), which showed the genetic background as critical factors. In other examples, a group of genes have been found to be involved in TSD in turtles (Chojnowski and Braun 2012); and a study in medaka showed that an autosomal locus and sex-determining region on the Y chromosome contributed simultaneously to sex reversal (Shinomiya et al. 2005; Kato et al. 2010, 2011).C. semilaevis is a valuable commercial fish, which distributed along the coast of the Yellow and Bohai Seas of China. The primary sex of C. semilaevis is determined by the female heterogametic sex determination system (ZW♀/ZZ♂). The females and males have considerably different growth rates, where adult females are 2–4 times larger than adult males in size (Chen et al. 2009). Therefore, female fish are preferred in C. semilaevis aquaculture; however, some genetic females can reverse into phenotypic males in the early stages from around d 50 to 90. In C. semilaevis, sex reversal is also sensitive to high temperatures, and the number of sex reversed or pseudomale fish increases with increasing temperature (S. Chen et al. 2014), and, even in normal conditions (22°), it is still easy to find a large portion of pseudomale fish.Sex reversed or pseudomale fish have a similar growth rate to normal males, resulting in increased costs for farmers than those for females with higher growth rates. To date, the female ratios in most farms are around 20%; hence, controlling the occurrence of sex reversal, or improving the female ratio, is the most important problem for sustainable aquaculture. Some management techniques have been developed to utilize pseudomales to produce all-female offspring or improve female ratios for ZW sex-determination fish (Piferrer et al. 2012), but it is not feasible for half-smooth tongue sole, because WW fish cannot survive in early development, and genetic offspring of pseudomales tends to reverse more than those of normal males (S. Chen et al. 2014).In tongue sole aquaculture, most farms can control the temperature relatively well to 22°, but not all genetic female offspring of the same family, and under the same environment, reversed to pseudomales; therefore, this dichotomy implies the genetic difference between reversed and nonreversed fish, and it was speculated that genes on the Z chromosome may contribute to sex reversal (S. Chen et al. 2014). Therefore, it is necessary to investigate if there are variants controlling sex reversal, and if we can genetically control sex reversal in tongue sole aquaculture. In the present study, we obtained the sex reversal phenotype using tissue sections combined with molecular markers, and performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to detect the genetic locus associated with sex reversal using an efficient generalized linear mixed model (Kang et al. 2010).In March 2013, six adult females and 11 phenotypic males of half-smooth tongue sole were randomly selected and tagged as the parents, which were cultivated in Dongying, Shandong Province, China. These parental fish were raised in the same pond for reproduction. The larvae were transferred to another pond 36 hr after hatching. Since sex reversal of half-smooth tongue sole usually happens in the first 90 d in early stage, so this experiment was designed to last for 90 d at a constant temperature of 22° to avoid additional environmental effects. Thereafter, 268 fry were randomly selected for DNA extraction, parentage analysis, and genetic and phenotypic sex detection. Finally, 115 genetic females were used for GWAS. In April 2014, 399 fish raised under the same conditions as those in 2013, with no parental information, were randomly harvested from the same farm for confirmation of our detected polymorphism associated with sex reversal.Fins and gonads were sampled, and fins were used for DNA extraction. The genetic sex was determined using the method of Chen et al. (2009), and all the samples were assigned parents with 21 pairs of SSR primers (Song et al. 2012) (Table 1) using Cervus 3.0 software (Slate et al. 2000) with a Maximum Likelihood approach; only individuals with 99.99% liability were reported. Thereafter, gonads of genetic females were used for phenotypic sex determination by tissue section (Supplemental Material, File S1).Gonad tissues samples were immediately placed into Bouin’s fixation solution overnight. The fixed tissues were dehydrated in steps from 70, 80, and 90, to 95% ethyl alcohol for 1 hr each, respectively, and finally in 100% ethyl alcohol for 40 min. Gonad tissues were cleared in solution (xylene:ethyl alcohol, 1:1) for 40 min, then in xylene for 30 min. The tissues were treated with a paraffin solution (xylene:paraffin, 1:1) for 1 hr, then pure paraffin for 1 hr twice. The tissues were embedded with paraffin for sectioning. Splices of 6 µm were produced using a Leica 2200 tissue splicer. Dewaxing was carried out in pure xylene 15 min twice, and then samples were placed in 100% benzene alcohol for 5 min. Samples were rehydrated in 100, 90, 80, 70, 50, and 30% ethyl alcohol for 2 min each, respectively, then in deionized water for 3 min twice. The samples were stained using HE solution. The HE solution included four types: (A) 5 g hematoxylin dissolved in 50 ml ethyl alcohol; (B) 100 g alum dissolved in 1000 ml water; (C) solution A and B were mixed together and heated for 2 min, and 2.5 g mercuric chloride was added, then the solution was left to stand overnight, then the solution was filtered; and (D) 10 g eosin was dissolved in 1000 ml ethyl alcohol.Samples were stained in A solution for 5–10 min, then in water for 10 min until the water became blue, then for another 3 min in fresh water; next they were washed in hydrochloric acid solution (1 ml concentrated hydrochloric acid dissolved in 99 ml 70% ethyl alcohol) for several seconds until the samples became light red. Samples were washed in water for 3 min until the water became blue. The samples were then placed in gradient ethyl alcohol for 2 min respectively for each step, from 30, 50, and 70, and finally 80%. The samples were then stained in eosin solution for ∼20 sec, and placed in the gradient ethyl alcohol for 2 min per step, from 90, 95, 100, and 100% ethyl alcohol, then benzene alcohol for 2 min, and xylene for 2 min twice.The samples were observed and analyzed using an Olympus microscope.One hundred and fifteen genetic females were genotyped using the 2b-RAD method from the Oebiotech Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The 2b-RAD libraries were prepared with BsaXI following the reported protocol (Wang et al. 2012), and were subjected to single-end sequencing using an Illumina HiSeq2500 platform. Using sequencing, a total of 612,818,007 reads was produced, averaging 5,328,852 reads per sample. The 2b-RAD genotyping were performed with the RADtyping program v1.5 (Fu et al. 2013). Reads with no restriction sites, or containing ambiguous base calls (N), long homopolymer regions (>10 bp), excessive numbers of low quality positions (>10 positions with quality of <20) were removed. Finally, 138,666 unique tags were obtained, an average level of coverage was 16× per sample. Totally 66,563 SNP genotypes were obtained and mapped to C. semilaevis genome (S. Chen et al. 2014) with SOAP2 (Li et al. 2009). The SNPs with minor allele frequencies of <5% or a call rate of <0.90 were discarded, and the remaining missing data were imputed through linkage disequilibrium with 10 closest neighboring markers (see File S2 for the source code). After the quality control, the final genotypic data (File S3 and File S4) in the analysis consisted of 17,618 SNPs without missing genotypes (Table 2).Sex reversal was considered a binomial trait, and the incidence of sex reversal was recorded as one, and the others as zero. We used a logistic animal model to perform an association analysis:
(1)
where p is the frequency of sex reversal; m is SNP genotype, and was taken as a fixed effect; b is the allele substitution effect; g is the additive effect and follows the distribution K is the realized genetic relationship matrix; and e is the random error and follows the distribution of Construction K follows these procedures, (1) code the genotype matrix M for each marker, 0 for homozygotes, 1 for heterozygote, and 2 for the other homozygote; (2) standardize M for each SNP as Z, (3) calculate K as where nm is the number of markers. An association analysis of each SNP was conducted by comparing the full to the null model:
(2)
and the −2*log-likelihood test statistics approximately followed the Chi-square distribution with a freedom of degree of 1. To improve the computation speed, a method similar to that of the efficient multi-locus mixed model (Segura et al. 2012) was used. First, DMU (Madsen and Jensen 2002) was employed to estimate the variance components, and then the linear mixed model was transformed to a simple linear regression through the Cholesky decomposition of the phenotypic (co)variance structure V as the following equation:
(3)
where and m* is the corresponding SNP column of the M* matrix. After a genome scan, the threshold value was determined (Piepho 2001), and, once a genetic locus was detected, the corresponding confidence interval was calculated with Li’s method (Li 2011).File S1 is phenotypic file containing id, sire, dam, genetic sex, phenotypic sex, and incidence of sex reversal. File S2 contains the source code for miss genotype imputation. File S3 contains genotypes (coded as 0, 1 and 2) of 115 samples, and File S4 is the SNP information.Using sex-specific markers (Chen et al. 2009), 132 genetic females and 136 males were determined, and, among the genetic males, 66 were determined as pseudomale (Table 3). Normal females (Figure 1A), normal males (Figure 1C), and pseudomales (Figure 1, B and D) in reversal were easily distinguished using tissue sections. Before sex reversal was completed, the ZW fish showed a chimeric gonad; after sex reversal was completed, the gonad developed as that of normal males. Parentage analysis showed that these fish came from 11 families, among which the sires of two families were pseudomales. All the ZW offspring of these two pseudomale families reversed into phenotypic males without any exception.Sex differentiation of the half-smooth tongue sole for pseudomales. (A) Ovary and oocytes (×100). (B) Chimeric gonad during the late process of sex reversal from ZW female to pseudomale, mainly composed of spermatangia; the red triangle indicates the oocytes (×100). (C) Testis and sperm cells (×100). (D) Chimeric gonad during the early stage of sex reversal from ZW females to pseudomale; the green triangle indicates the sperm cell (×100).GWAS was conducted with all the ZW individuals (except for 17 individuals that failed to genotype with 2b-RAD), and the single SNP at 6,676,874 bp on the Z chromosome (named as Cyn_Z_6676874) was found to be strongly associated with sex reversal in half-smooth tongue sole (P < 1.0 × 10−7; Figure 2A). The SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 was located at the third intron of the F-box and leucine rich repeat protein 17 (FBXL17) gene, which is the substrate-recognition component of the SCF (SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein)-type E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, interacting with ubiquitination targets through other protein interaction domains (Jin et al. 2004), and the 95% confidence interval was from 6,337,129 to 7,126,693 bp (Figure 2B), where eight known genes were harbored (Figure 2C). Cyn_Z_6676874 explained 82.7% of the genetic variation (the variance components are and respectively), or 58.4% of the phenotypic variation; it had two alleles, A and T, and when the genotype was ZAW, none of genetic females reversed, whereas for the ZTW genotype, some of the genetic females reversed.GWAS of sex reversal in the half-smooth tongue sole. (A) Manhattan plot of SNPs associated with sex reversal, x-axis presents genomic coordinates along chromosomes 1–20 and sex chromosomes W and Z. The y-axis presents a negative logarithm of P-values. The horizontal dashed line is the genome-wide threshold, SNPs above this line are significantly associated with sex reversal. (B) Enlarged plot for the Z chromosome, the two vertical dashed lines indicate the region of the 95% confidence interval for the detected locus. (C) The known genes located in the 95% confidence interval.To confirm SNP Cyn_Z_6676874, we designed primers (Table 4) to amplify the target fragment containing this SNP, and tested it by sequencing in the population sampled in 2014. Among 399 samples, 196 individuals were genetic females, including 95 ZAW and 101 ZTW genotypes. Tissue sections showed that none of the ZAW individuals reversed, whereas for the ZTW genotype, 52 individuals reversed into phenotypic males.Sex reversal has usually been considered an adaptive strategy for animals in evolution (Shapiro 1987; Ghiselin 1974). According Darwin’s theory of evolution, sex reversal must have a genetic basis. The findings in P. vitticeps showed that genetic background was related to sex reversal to some extent (Holleley et al. 2015), whereas, in the half-smooth tongue sole, it was originally thought that temperature was the critical factor affecting the sex ratio. However, in the present study, the locus Cys_Z_6676874 indicted that the genetic background was the primary basis of sex reversal. This is not in conflict with other reports (S. Chen et al. 2014), which showed that higher temperature lead to lower female ratio, because first, our study removed the environmental effects in the experimental design, and it was unnecessary and impossible to repeat earlier experiments; second, we speculated that only ZTW individuals were sensitive to temperature, and the female ratio was sensitive to temperature at the population level, especially if the parental genotypes were missing. Our findings suggest that a more detailed experimental design based on the sex reversal locus is important, and necessary, for the further study of temperature-dependent sex determination. Methylation was also thought to cause sex reversal, because the methylation level of pseudomales was higher than that of normal females, and similar to that of normal males (Shao et al. 2014). Two pseudomale families also showed possible imprinting occurring for pseudomales, which was inherited by the offspring, because all of them reversed into phenotypic males. Regardless of whether methylation is a cause or a result of sex reversal, the sex reversal locus we detected illuminated the mechanism of sex determination of half-smooth tongue sole.Besides FBXL17, there are seven known genes located within the confidence interval of the sex reversal locus: AhpC/TSA Antioxidant Enzyme Domain Containing 1 (AAED1), Zinc Finger Protein 367 (ZNF367), U-Box Domain Containing 5 (UBOX5), SET and MYND Domain Containing 1 (SMYD1), Fatty Acid Binding Protein 1 (FABP1), Mitochondrial Ribosomal Protein S27 (MRPS27), and Ring Finger Protein 122 (RNF122). To date, to our knowledge, no reports or obvious evidence have shown that these genes are directly related to various pathways of sex determination. However, they are still worthy of attention because they are located on the sex chromosome, where any variation may have an effect on the genes underlying sex determination. The confirmation of SNP Cyn_Z_6676874 indicated that it was the first barrier regulating sex reversal from genetic females to phenotypic males. We noticed that ZTW individuals may not always reverse into phenotypic male; therefore, we performed GWAS again with only individuals of the ZTW genotype to determine whether a significant gene interacted with the Cyn_Z_6676874 locus. The results revealed no significant locus (Figure 3), possibly because the sample size was limited, or because minor genes control the remaining 17.3% of the genetic variation of sex reversal, and interact with only the ZTW genotype. It is important to increase the sample size of ZTW individuals in order to map all loci, and understand the pathway of sex reversal.GWAS of sex reversal with the half-smooth tongue sole of the ZTW genotype. No locus was detected associated with sex reversal mapping with individuals of the ZTW genotype. The green horizontal line is the threshold.Sex reversal has resulted in considerable increased costs in tongue sole aquaculture in recent years in China, and the uncertainty of the female fry ratio has resulted in panic and risk in investment in aquaculture for farmers; therefore, effective management techniques are necessary to control sex reversal and keep the female ratio high. Usually, a specific pseudomale (ZW/male) ratio was considered to improve female percentage in offspring, because pseudomales carry the W chromosome (Piferrer et al. 2012). In our study, we did not find the ZAW/female×ZTW/male cross, but the offspring from two ZTW/female×ZTW/male families precluded this hypothesis, and verified its impossibility in aquaculture, similarly to the conclusion of other studies (L. Chen et al. 2014). The sex reversal locus reported here could be used directly in breeding to produce nonreversed half-smooth tongue soles, keeping the phenotypic female ratio of offspring at around one-half. Using ZAZA males as sires, the genetic female offspring are ZAW, and none of them will reverse into phenotypic males (Figure 4, A and D). If normal female ZAW are used, then the unfavorable allele T will be removed from the population, and the genetic female offspring of the next generations will never reverse into phenotypic males (Figure 4A). These two mating techniques are beneficial for the effective management of the aquaculture of the half-smooth tongue sole.Six possible cross modes of normal males and females. Modes (A) and (B) ensure the genetic female offspring will not reverse to phenotypic males (n); in modes (C–F), the genetic female offspring of (ZTW) will possibly reverse to phenotypic males (pr). In mode (A), the offspring carries only the A allele, in the next generations, the genetic female will never reverse to the phenotypic male.Funding was received from Special Scientific Research Funds for Central Nonprofit Institutes, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences (2016ZD0203 and 2016B005).Author contributions: J.L. and H.L. wrote the manuscript, J.L. performed the microscopic and histological analyses, and confirmation of the detected locus. H.L. designed the study and performed statistical analysis. The authors declare no competing financial interests.Supplemental material is available online at www.g3journal.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1534/g3.116.036822/-/DC1.Communicating editor: R. HoustonThis is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Volume 7 Issue 2, February 2017The Genetics Society of America (GSA), founded in 1931, is the professional membership organization for scientific researchers and educators in the field of genetics. Our members work to advance knowledge in the basic mechanisms of inheritance, from the molecular to the population level.Online ISSN: 2160-1836GET CONNECTED Subscribe with RSS. Subscribe via email. Sign up to receive alert notifications of new articles.Copyright © 2020 by the Genetics Society of AmericaAdvertisementFish Physiology and Biochemistry
 41, 
673–683(2015)Cite this article402 Accesses8 Citations1 AltmetricMetricsA new cell line was established from half-smooth tongue sole Cynoglossus semilaevis pseudomale gonad (CSPMG). Primary culture was initiated from gonad tissues pieces, and the CSPMG cells were cultured at 24 °C in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium/F12 medium (1:1) (pH7.0), supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum, basic fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, insulin-like growth factor-I, 2-mercaptoethanol, penicillin and streptomycin. The cultured CSPMG cells, in fibroblast shape, proliferated to 100 % confluency 10 days later and had been subcultured to passage 109. Chromosome analyses indicated that the CSPMG cells exhibited chromosomal aneuploidy with a modal chromosome number of 42, which displayed the normal diploid karyotype of half-smooth tongue sole (2n = 42t, NF = 42). Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction revealed CSPMG cells could express gonad somatic cell functional genes Sox9a, Wt1a and weakly germ cell marker gene Vasa, but not male specific gene Dmrt1. Transfection experiment demonstrated that CSPMG cells transfected with pEGFP-N3 plasmid and small RNA could express green and red fluorescence signals with high transfection efficiency. In conclusion, a continuous CSPMG cell line has been established successfully. The cell line might serve as a valuable tool for studies on the mechanism of sex determination, sex reversal and gonad development in flatfish.This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.Basavaraja N, Nandeesha MC, Varghese TJ, Keshavanath P, Srikanth GK (1990) Induction of sex reversal in Oreochromis mossambicus by diethylstilbestrol. J Appl Ichthyol 6:46–50Article
  Google Scholar
 Béjar J, Borrego JJ, Carmen Alvarez M (1997) A continuous cell line from the cultured marine fish gilt-head seabream (Sparus aurata L.). Aquaculture 150:143–153Article
  Google Scholar
 Bhandari RK, Nakamura M, Kobayashi T, Nagahama Y (2006) Suppression of steroidogenic enzyme expression during androgen-induced sex reversal in Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus). Gen Comp Endocrinol 145:20–24Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Chakraborty SB, Banerjee S, Chatterjee S (2011) Increased androgen receptor expression in muscle tissue contributing to growth increase in androgen-treated Nile tilapia. Aquac Int 19:1119–1137Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Chen SL, Sha ZX, Ye HQ (2003) Establishment of a pluripotent embryonic cell line from sea perch (Lateolabrax japonicus) embryos. Aquaculture 218:141–151Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Chen SL, Li J, Deng SP, Tian YS, Wang QY, Zhuang ZM, Sha Z, Xu JY (2007) Isolation of female-specific AFLP markers and molecular identification of genetic sex in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Mar Biotechnol 9:273–280Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Chen SL, Tian YS, Yang JF, Shao CW, Ji XS, Zhai JM, Liao XL, Zhuang ZM, Su PZ, Xu JY, Sha ZX, Wu PF, Wang N (2009) Artificial gynogenesis and sex determination in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Mar Biotechnol 11:243–251Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Chen SL, Zhang GJ, Shao CW, Huang QF, Liu G, Zhang P, Song WT, An N, Chalopin D, Volff JN, Hong YH, Li QY, Sha ZX, Zhou HL, Xie MS, Yu QL, Liu Y, Xiang H, Wang N, Wu K, Yang CG, Zhou Q, Liao XL, Yang LF, Hu QM, Zhang JL, Meng L, Jin LJ, Tian YS, Lian JM, Yang JF, Miao GD, Liu SS, Liang Z, Yan F, Li YZ, Sun B, Zhang H, Zhang J, Zhu Y, Du M, Zhao YW, Schart M, Tang QS, Wang J (2014) Whole-genome sequence of a flatfish provides insights into ZW sex chromosome evolution and adaptation to a benthic lifestyle. Nat Genet 46:253–260Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Chiang EFL, Pai CI, Wyatt M, Yan YL, Postlethwait J, Chung BC (2001) Two sox9 genes on duplicated zebrafish chromosomes: expression of similar transcription activators in distinct sites. Dev Biol 231:149–163Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 De Bock MS, Greco LSL (2010) Sex reversal and growth performance in juvenile females of the freshwater crayfish Cherax quadricarinatus (Parastacidae): effect of increasing temperature and androgenic gland extract in the diet. Aquac Int 18:231–243Article
  Google Scholar
 Deng SP, Chen SLXuJY, Liu BW (2009) Molecular cloning, characterization and expression analysis of gonadal P450aromatase in the half-smooth tongue-sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis. Aquaculture 287:211–218Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Devlin RH, Nagahama Y (2002) Sex determination and sex differentiation in fish: an overview of genotype, phenotypeal, and environmental influences. Aquaculture 208:191–364Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Dong XL, Chen SL, Ji XS, Shao CW (2011) Molecular cloning, characterization and expression analysis of Sox9a and Foxl2 genes in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Acta Oceanol Sin 30:68–77Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Fan TJ, Wang XF (2002) In vitro culture of embryonic cells from shrimp Penaeus chinensis. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 267:175–184Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Fan TJ, Ren BX, Geng XF, Yu QT, Wang LY (2010) Establishment of a turbot fin cell line and its susceptibility to turbot reddish body iridovirus. Cytotechnology 62:217–223Article
  PubMed Central
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Green BW, Teichert-Coddington DR (1993) Production of Oreochromis niloticus fry for hormonal sex reversal in relation to water temperature. J Appl Ichthyol 9:230–236Article
  Google Scholar
 Guo Y, Cheng H, Huang X, Gao S, Yu H, Zhou R (2005) Gene structure, multiple alternative splicing, and expression in gonads of zebrafish Dmrt1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 330:950–957Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Higaki S, Koyama Y, Shirai E, Yokota T, Fujioka Y, Sakai N, Takada T (2013) Establishment of testicular and ovarian cell lines from Honmoroko (Gnathopogon caerulescens). Fish Physiol Biochem 39:701–711Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Hong YH, Liu TM, Zhao HB, Xu HY, Wang WJ, Liu R, Chen TS, Deng JR, Gui JF (2004) Establishment of a normal medakafish spermatogonial cell line capable of sperm production in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:8011–8016Article
  PubMed Central
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Hu QM, Chen SL, Gao FT, Li YZ, Liu SS, Liu F, Yang JF, Du M (2014) Differences in sex reversion and growth between normal and neomale stock in half-smooth tongue sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis. Aquac Int. doi:10.1007/s10499-014-9757-7Google Scholar
 Huang JQ, Chen SL, Liu Y, Shao CW, Lin F, Wang N, Hu QM (2014) Molecular characterization, sexually dimorphic expression, and functional analysis of 3′-untranslated region of vasa gene in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Theriogenology 82:213–224Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Ijiri S, Kaneko H, Kobayashi T, Wang DS, Sakai F, Paul-Prasanth B, Nakamura M, Nagahama Y (2008) Sexual dimorphic expression of genes in gonads during early differentiation of a teleost fish, the Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus. Biol Reprod 78:333–341Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Kato Y, Kobayashi K, Watanabe H, Iguchi T (2011) Environmental sex determination in the branchiopod crustacean Daphnia magna: deep conservation of a Doublesex gene in the sex-determining pathway. PLoS Genet 7:e1001345Article
  PubMed Central
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Kobayashi T, Kajiura-Kobayashi H, Nagahama Y (2002) Two isoforms of vasa homologs in a teleost fish: their differential expression during germ cell differentiation. Mech Dev 111:167–171Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Kobayashi T, Kajiura-Kobayashi H, Guan G, Nagahama Y (2008) Sexual dimorphic expression of DMRT1 and Sox9a during gonadal differentiation and hormone-induced sex reversal in the teleost fish Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus). Dev Dyn 237:297–306Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Parameswaran V, Shukla R, Bhonde RR, Sahul Hameed AS (2006) Splenic cell line from sea bass, Lates calcarifer: establishment and characterization. Aquaculture 261:43–53Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Parameswaran V, Ishaq Ahmed VP, Shukla R, Bhonde RR, Sahul Hameed AS (2007) Development and characterization of two new cell lines from milkfish (Chanos chanos) and grouper (Epinephelus coioides) for virus isolation. Mar Biotechnol 9:281–291Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Qin QW, Wu TH, Jia TL, Hegdec A, Zhang RQ (2006) Development and characterization of a new tropical marine fish cell line from grouper, Epinephelus coioides susceptible to iridovirus and nodavirus. J Virol Methods 131:58–64Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Rodríguez-Marí A, Yan YL, BreMiller RA, Wilson C, Cañestro C, Postlethwait JH (2005) Characterization and expression pattern of zebrafish Anti-Müllerian hormone (Amh) relative to sox9a, sox9b, and cyp19a1a, during gonad development. Gene Expr Patterns 5:655–667Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Sakai N (2002) Transmeiotic differentiation of zebrafish germ cells into functional sperm in culture. Development 129:3359–3365CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Servili A, Bufalino MR, Nishikawa R, Sanchez de Melo I, Muñoz-Cueto JA, Lee LEJ (2009) Establishment of long term cultures of neural stem cells from adult sea bass, Dicentrarchus labrax. Comp Biochem Phys A 152:245–254Article
  Google Scholar
 Shao CW, Li QY, Chen SL, Zhang P, Lian JM, Hu QM, Sun B, Jin LJ, Liu SS, Wang ZJ, Zhao HM, Jin ZH, Liang Z, Li YZ, Zheng QM, Zhang Y, Wang J, Zhang GJ (2014) Epigenetic modification and inheritance in sexual reversal of fish. Genome Res 24:604–615Article
  PubMed Central
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 She ZY, Yang WX (2014) Molecular mechanisms involved in mammalian primary sex determination. J Mol Endocrinol 53:21–37Article
  Google Scholar
 Smith ES, Phelps RP (2001) Impact of feed storage conditions on growth and efficacy of sex reversal of Nile tilapia. N Am J Aquac 63:242–245Article
  Google Scholar
 Stelkens RB, Wedekind C (2010) Environmental sex reversal, Trojan sex genes, and sex ratio adjustment: conditions and population consequences. Mol Ecol 19:627–646Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Sun A, Fan TJ, Yang XX, Xu B, Xu XH, Guo XY (2011) Establishment of a spleen cell line from large yellow croaker Pseudosciaena crocea and its primitive application in foreign gene transfection. J Ocean Univ China 10:397–401Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Sunil Kumar G, Bright Singh IS, Philip R (2001) Development of a cell culture system from the ovarian tissue of African catfish (Clarias gariepinus). Aquaculture 194:51–62Article
  Google Scholar
 Wang N, Wang XL, Sha ZX, Tian YS, Chen SL (2010a) Development and characterization of a new marine fish cell line from turbot (Scophthalmus maximus). Fish Physiol Biochem 36:1227–1234Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wang XL, Wang N, Sha ZX, Chen SL (2010b) Establishment, characterization of a new cell line from heart of half smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Fish Physiol Biochem 36:1181–1189Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Wei YB, Fan TJ, Jiang GJ, Sun A, Xu XH, Wang J (2009) Establishment of a novel fin cell line from Brown-marbled grouper, Epinephelus fuscoguttatus (Forsskål), and evaluation of its viral susceptibility. Aquac Res 40:1523–1531Article
  CAS
  Google Scholar
 Wei YB, Fan TJ, Jiang GJ, Xu XH, Sun A (2010) A novel heart-cell line from brown-marbled grouper Epinephelus fuscoguttatus and its susceptibility to iridovirus. J Fish Biol 76:1149–1158Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Yamaguchi T, Yamaguchi S, Hirai T, Takeshi K (2007) Follicle stimulating hormone signaling and Foxl2 are involved in transcriptional regulation of aromatase gene during gonadal sex differentiation in Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 359:935–940Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zhang B, Wang XL, Sha ZX, Yang CG, Liu SS, Wang N, Chen SL (2011) Establishment and characterization of a testicular cell line from the half-smooth tongue sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis. Int J Biol Sci 7:452–459Article
  PubMed Central
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zhao ZS, Montgomery-Brock D, Lee CS, Lu YN (2003) Establishment, characterization and viral susceptibility of 3 new cell lines from snakehead, Channa striatus (Blooch). Methods Cell Sci 25:155–166Article
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zheng Y, Wang N, Xie MS, Sha ZX, Chen SL (2012) Establishment and characterization of a new fish cell line from head kidney of half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis). Fish Physiol Biochem 38:1635–1643Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zhou R, Liu L, Guo Y, Yu H, Cheng H, Huang X, Tiersch TR, Berta P (2003) Similar gene structure of two Sox9a genes and their expression patterns during gonadal differentiation in a teleost fish, rice field eel (Monopterus albus). Mol Reprod Dev 66:211–217Article
  CAS
  PubMed
  Google Scholar
 Zhuang ZM, Wu D, Zhang SC, Pang QX, Wang CL, Wan RJ (2006) G-banding patterns of the chromosomes of tonguefish Cynoglossus semilaevis Günther, 1873. J Appl Ichthyol 22:437–440Article
  Google Scholar
 Download referencesThis work was supported by Grants from National Nature Science Foundation of China (31130057; 31472269), State 863 High-Technology R&D Project of China (2012AA10A402; 2012AA10A403-2), Taishan Scholar Project Fund of Shandong of China and Post-Doctoral Innovation Project Fund of Shandong Province.This study was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences.Key Lab of Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, ChinaAi Sun, Song-Lin Chen, Feng-Tao Gao, Hai-Long Li, Xiao-Feng Liu, Na Wang & Zhen-Xia ShaCorrespondence to Song-Lin Chen.Reprints and PermissionsSun, A., Chen, S., Gao, F. et al. Establishment and characterization of a gonad cell line from half-smooth tongue sole Cynoglossus semilaevis pseudomale. Fish Physiol Biochem 41, 673–683 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10695-015-0037-xDownload citationReceived
06 January 2015Accepted
20 February 2015Published
28 February 2015Issue Date
June 2015DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10695-015-0037-xInstant access to the full article PDF.34,95 €Price includes VAT for Russian FederationImmediate online access to all issues from 2019. Subscription will auto renew annually.66,39 €This is the net price. Taxes to be calculated in checkout.Rent this article via DeepDyve.Learn more about Institutional subscriptionsAdvertisementOver 10 million scientific documents at your fingertipsNot logged in - 92.38.189.10Not affiliated© 2020 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature.We use cookies to ensure the functionality of our website, to personalize content and advertising, to provide social media features, and to analyze our traffic. If you allow us to do so, we also inform our social media, advertising and analysis partners about your use of our website. You can decide for yourself which categories you want to deny or allow. Please note that based on your settings not all functionalities of the site are available. View our privacy policyVasa is a highly conserved ATP-dependent RNA helicase expressed mainly in germ cells. The vasa gene plays a crucial role in the development of germ cell lineage and has become an excellent molecular marker in identifying germ cells in teleosts. However, little is known about the structure and function of the vasa gene in flatfish. In this study, the vasa gene (Csvasa) was isolated and characterized in half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis), an economically important flatfish in China. In the obtained 6425-bp genomic sequence, 23 exons and 22 introns were identified. The Csvasa gene encodes a 663-amino acid protein, including highly conserved domains of the DEAD-box protein family. The amino acid sequence also shared a high homology with other teleosts. Csvasa expression was mainly restricted to the gonads, with little or no expression in other tissues. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that Csvasa expression levels decreased during embryonic and early developmental stages and increased with the primordial germ cell proliferation. A typical sexually dimorphic expression pattern of Csvasa was observed during early development and sex differentiation, suggesting that the Csvasa gene might play a differential role in the proliferation and differentiation of male and female primordial germ cells (PGCs). Csvasa mRNA expression levels in neomales were significantly lower than those in normal males and females, indicating that the Csvasa gene might be implicated in germ cell development after sex reversal by temperature treatment. In addition, medaka (Oryzias latipes) PGCs could be transiently labeled by microinjection of synthesized mRNA containing the green fluorescence protein gene and 3′-untranslated region of Csvasa, which confirmed that the Csvasa gene has the potential to be used as a visual molecular marker of germ cells and laid a foundation for manipulation of PGCs in tongue sole reproduction.We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies.Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V.We use cookies on this site to enhance your user experience. By clicking any link on this page you are giving your consent for us to set cookies.   Continue   |   Learn more.+
Author Affiliations↵8 These authors contributed equally to this work.Environmental sex determination (ESD) occurs in divergent, phylogenetically unrelated taxa, and in some species, co-occurs with genetic sex determination (GSD) mechanisms. Although epigenetic regulation in response to environmental effects has long been proposed to be associated with ESD, a systemic analysis on epigenetic regulation of ESD is still lacking. Using half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) as a model—a marine fish that has both ZW chromosomal GSD and temperature-dependent ESD—we investigated the role of DNA methylation in transition from GSD to ESD. Comparative analysis of the gonadal DNA methylomes of pseudomale, female, and normal male fish revealed that genes in the sex determination pathways are the major targets of substantial methylation modification during sexual reversal. Methylation modification in pseudomales is globally inherited in their ZW offspring, which can naturally develop into pseudomales without temperature incubation. Transcriptome analysis revealed that dosage compensation occurs in a restricted, methylated cytosine enriched Z chromosomal region in pseudomale testes, achieving equal expression level in normal male testes. In contrast, female-specific W chromosomal genes are suppressed in pseudomales by methylation regulation. We conclude that epigenetic regulation plays multiple crucial roles in sexual reversal of tongue sole fish. We also offer the first clues on the mechanisms behind gene dosage balancing in an organism that undergoes sexual reversal. Finally, we suggest a causal link between the bias sex chromosome assortment in the offspring of a pseudomale family and the transgenerational epigenetic inheritance of sexual reversal in tongue sole fish.↵9 Corresponding authorsE-mail zhanggj@genomics.cnE-mail chensl@ysfri.ac.cn[Supplemental material is available for this article.]Article published online before print. Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.162172.113.This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genome.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml). After six months, it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported), as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/.What's this?View all ...Copyright © 2020 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press